1.1. Introduction  
1.1.1.  Policy  
Civil UAS operating in the UK must meet at least the same safety and operational 
standards as manned aircraft when conducting the same type of operation in the same 
airspace.  
As a result , when compared to the operations of manned aircraft of an equivalent class  or 
category , UAS operations must not present or create a greater hazard to persons, 
property, vehicles or vessels, either  in the air or on the ground.  
However, with unmanned aviation, the primary consideration is the type of operation being 
conducted, rather than who or what is conducting it, or why it is being done.  Because 
there is ‘no one on board’ the aircraft, the consequences of an incident or accident are purely dependent on where that incident/accident takes place.  The CAA’s focus is 
therefore on the risk that the UAS operation presents to third parties, which means that 
more effort or proof is required where the risk is greater.   
The CAA will supplement CAP 722 with further written guidance when required.  For the 
purpose of UAS operations, the 'See and Avoid' principle employed in manned aircraft is 
referred to as 'Detect and Avoid'.  
1.1.2.  Unmanned aircraft – Clarification of terms  
Although all definitions are contained within CAP 722D , the following are reproduced here 
for clarity:  
‘unmanned aircraft’  means any aircraft operating or designed to operate autonomously or 
to be piloted remotely without a pilot on board;  
‘aircraft’  means any machine that can derive support in the atmosphere from the reactions 
of the air other than reactions of the air against the earth's surface;  
For clarification, the CAA considers the following as flying ‘objects’ rather than flying ‘mach ines’, and so are not considered to be unmanned aircraft:  
• Paper aeroplane.  
control link.  
• Frisbees, darts and other thrown toys.  
For the purposes of electrically powered unmanned aircraft, the batteries are considered as part of the aircraft, and the ‘charge’ is considered as the fuel.  
Note:  
The term ‘Remotely Piloted Aircraft System (RPAS) is used interchangeably with the term UAS. The CAA now considers ‘RPAS’ as the preferred terminology, rather than UAS, 
because it is gender inclusive. However, the regulation refers to UAS, and so this is the 
terminology used within CAP 722, and within AMC/GM .  
1.1.3.  Scope 
The guidance within CAP 722 concerns civilian UAS as they are defined in CAP 722D  
(UAS Definitions and Glossary of Terms ). It primarily focuses on the aspects connected 
with unmanned aircraft that are piloted remotely, whilst acknowledging the potential for autonomous operations in the future.  
UAS operated by the military are regul ated by the Military Aviation Authority (MAA).  
1.1.4.  The role of the CAA  
The role of the CAA is set out within the website, here. 
The CAA regulates aviation within the legislative framework as set by the government and 
overseen by the Department for Transport.  
Following the UK departure from the EU, the CAA now has responsibility for carrying out 
rulemaking tasks, which drive regulatory change. The CAA works closely  with the 
Government to carry out these tasks, and ultimately the government will make the resulting legislative change. Further information on this process can be found here
. 
Specific tasks of the CAA include:  
The role of the CAA 
• Carrying out the tasks of the competent authority as defined in Article 18 of the UAS Implementing regulation (UAS IR)  Assimilated Regulation (EU)  2019/947. 
• The production of policy and guidance. 
• Issuing safety notices and directives . 
• Issuing general permissions and exemptions to the Air Navigation Order . 
• Oversight activities of organisations and persons holding authorisations and 
approvals .  
• Carrying out enforcement activity in cooperation with the Investigation and Enforcement Team.  
It is not the role of the CAA to carry out Research and Development (R&D) activities; these 
must be performed by the UAS industry. The R &D process could include consultation with 
the CAA at appropriate stages so that the CAA can provide guidance on the interpretation of the applicable rules and regulati ons. 
It is strongly recommended that developers of new or novel technology for UAS or support 
system set up a programme of discussion and review of their research and development 
activity with the CAA through the innovation team; early engagement is vital in the 
process. This will ensure that UAS and system developers will have access to the best advice on the applicable regulations. More information can be found here
.
1.2.1.  The Chicago Convention 
As a signatory to the Chicago Convention of 7 December 1944 and a member of ICAO, 
the United Kingdom undertakes to comply with the provisions of the Convention and 
Standards contained in Annexes to the Convention, except  where it has filed a Difference 
to any of those standards.  
Article 3 of the Convention provides that the Convention applies only to civil aircraft and not to State aircraft. State aircraft are defined as being aircraft used in military, customs 
and police services. No State aircraft may fly over the territory of another State without 
authorisation. Contracting States undertake when issuing Regulations for their State 
aircraft that they will have “due regard for the safety of navigation of civil ai rcraft”.  
Article 8 of the Convention provides that no aircraft capable of being flown without a pilot shall be flown without a pilot over the territory of a Contracting State without special 
authorisation by that State.  Under this Article, ICAO has determined that the term “ without 
a pilot ” should be taken to mean without a pilot on- board the aircraft  and hence this has 
specific relevance to unmanned aircraft operations.     
Article 8 of the Convention also requires that “each contracting State undertake to insure 
sic that the flight of such aircraft without a pilot in regions open to civil aircraft shall be so 
controlled as to obviate danger to civil aircraft”.  
1.2.1.1.  ICAO Annexes  
The 19 Annexes to the Chicago convention contain the International Standards and 
Recommended Practices (SARPS), upon which every ICAO member State then uses to 
create its own national regulations, or in some cases a set of ‘regionalised’ regulations 
(such as within the European Union).  
ICAO is currently in the process of developing international SARPS covering Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems which are conducting international Instrument Flight Rules (IFR) 
operations within controlled airspace and from aerodromes.  These SARPS fit into the 
Certified category of UAS operations (see 2.2.3 below) and the appropriate UK regulations will be adapted in accordance with these SARPS when they are completed.  
1.2.2.  UAS Regulation within the UK  
UAS are regulated under two separate legislative frameworks:  
regulation). 
- The Air Navigation Order 2016, as amended, within the framework of the Civil 
Aviation Act 1982.  
Regulations made under these frameworks can be found on the CAA website,  here. 
This section describes these two frameworks and how UAS are regulated within them . 
Figure 1- Regulatory framework  
The relevant EU regulations were  transferred across into UK domestic law, as UK 
regulations.  These regulations are referred to as ‘ Assimilated  EU law’, and will be 
amended as necessary. It should be noted that these no longer mirror the equivalent EU versions of the regulation.    
It should be noted that the names of the ‘ As
 similated’ regulations  (E.g., COMMISSION 
IMPLEMENTING REGULATION [EU] 2019/947 ) have not been substantially  changed.  However, 
there are differences, and extreme care must be taken when any reference is made to a regulation to ensure that the regulation made in UK domestic law is being referenced.   
The revised naming convention that is used is as follows:  
• Full name of the regulation : 
“Assimilated Regulation (EU) year/### ” 
• After first use within a document, the shortened version is used:  CAP 722 SeriesAMC/GMUK Secondary 
LegislationUK Primary 
Legislation ICAO Standards & 
Recomended Practices
Chicago 
Convention 
Civil Aviation 
Act 2012
Air Navigation 
Order 2016 and 
subsequennt 
amendments
n/a
CAP 722
Basic 
Regulation 
2018/1139
UK Regulation 
(EU)
2019/947
AMC/GM
CAP 722
UK Regulation 
(EU) 2019/945
AMC/GM
CAP 722
“UK Reg (EU) year/ ###” 
####the order (year first or number first) is wholly dependent on how the 
regulation was originally expressed.  
Note:  
The presumption to be followed is that any reference made in domestic law to EU 
legislation should be interpreted as a reference to the ‘ assimilated  EU law’ version of the 
EU legislation that applies in UK domestic law (as opposed to the EU law version).  
1.2.3.  T he Basic Regulation  
The Basic Regulation (BR), formally known as   ‘REGULATION (EU) 2018/1139 OF THE 
EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL as retained (and amended in UK 
domesti c law) under the European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018’  s ets out the common 
rules for civil aviation within the UK.  It makes provision for Implementing Regulations or Delegated Regulations dealing with subjects such as airworthiness certification, continuing airworthiness, operations, pilot licensing, air traffic management and aerodromes.  
Note:   
The link above provides an ‘ assimilated version’ of the BR which has been applicable 
since 1 January 2021. 
The essential requirements for unmanned aircraft are contained within Annex IX of the BR.  
Certain categories of civil aircraft are also exempt from the need to comply with the BR 
and its Implementing Regulations. These exempt categories are listed in Annex I to the BR 
(normally referred to as ‘Annex I aircraft ’) and primarily consist of manned aircraft 
categories. The exempt categories which are of relevance for UAS are detailed in 
paragraph 2 of Annex I, and copied below :  
 tethered aircraft with no propulsion system, where the maximum length of the tether is 50 m, and where:  
• the MTOM of the aircraft, including its payload, is less than 25 kg, or  
• in the case of a lighter -than- air aircraft, the maximum design volume of 
the aircraft is less than 40 m
3;  
 tethered aircraft  with a MTOM of no more than 1 kg.     
All other UAS are subject to the BR and its implementing and delegated regulations as discussed below.  
An aircraft which is not required to comply with the B R remains subject to separate 
1.2.4.  The UAS Regulation Package  
Specific regulations covering UAS operations were published on 11 June 2019 and, like 
the BR, were  transferred into UK law at the end of the EU exit transition period . This ‘UAS 
Regu lation Package’ consists of two separate, but interlinked regulations as follows:  
 “Assimilated Regulation (EU) 2019/947 on the procedures and rules for the operation 
of unmanned aircraft ”.  
Note 1:   
This is sometimes  referred to as the ‘UAS Implementing Regulation ’ (UAS IR) . 
 
 “Assimilated Regulation (EU)  2019/945 on unmanned aircraft and on third country 
operators of unmanned aircraft systems ”.  
Note 2:   
This is sometimes referred to as the ‘UAS Delegated Regulation’ (UAS DR) .  
 
Both regulations have been amended separately by the UK, and by the EU since their first 
publication. A history of the UK changes to UK Regulation (EU) 2019/947 can be found in 
CAP 1789A.  
Further changes made to the European versions of these regulations by EASA, and the 
European Commission are not automatically adopted in the UK.  
Consolidated versions of each are published by the CAA as CAP 1789A  and CAP 1789B .   
1.2.4.1.  Applicability  
UK Regulation (EU) 2019/945 became applicable on 1 July 2019.  
UK Regulation (EU) 20 19/947 became applicable throughout the EU  and the UK  on 31 
December  2020.  
  
The main civil requirements for UK aviation are set out in the Air Navigation Order (ANO). 
A consolidated version of the ANO can be found on the CAA website .  
The provisions in the ANO concerning equipment requirements, operational rules, 
personnel licensing, aerodrome regulation and regulation of air traffic services apply to all non-military aircraft, organisations, individuals and facilities.  
With regard to UAS operations, the ANO provides additional regulatory content that is either:  
• not covered by other regulations – for example, specific national requirements 
such as carriage of radio equipment, endangerment regulations and legal penalties for breaches of t hese regulations; or  
• in support of a more general requirement stated within other regulations  – for 
example, airspace restrictions around aerodromes and other ‘protected’ locations.  
ANO 2016 article 240 applies to all persons and stipulates that a person must not recklessly or negligently act in a manner likely to endanger an aircraft or a person within 
an aircraft.  
ANO 2016 article 241 applies to all operating categories and stipulates that a person must not recklessly or negligently cause or permit an aircraft (manned or unmanned) to endanger any person or property (which includes other aircraft  and their occupants).  
If the CAA believes that danger may be caused by the flight of any aircraft (including 
unmanned aircraft) , then the CAA may direct that the aircraft must not be flown (ANO 2016 
article 257 – CAA’s power to prevent aircraft flying).   
1.2.6.  UAS related articles within the ANO  
Only certain parts of the ANO apply to UAS within the Specific and Open categories of Operation. The ANO in its entirety applies to Certified category operations.  
ANO article 23 exempts certain types/classes of aircraft from the majority of the ANO 
provisions and specifies the articles that still apply.  
With regard to unmanned aircraft, the effect of article 23 is that:  
• Open  and Specific  category operations (see 2.2.1 and 2.2.2) are only directly 
affected by a specific number of ANO articles, set out in Article 23. 
• Certified  category operations and certified unmanned aircraft (see 2.2.3) are  
The relevant requirements of the above articles are reflected within this document.  
1.2.7.  International Regulations: Bi -lateral Agreements and Working Arrangements  
Bilateral agreements and arrangements allow the airworthiness certification of civil 
aeronautical products to be shared between two countries.  
A Bilatera l Aviation Safety Agreement (BASA), Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) or 
Working Arrangement (WA) and their associated implementing procedures provide for technical cooperation between national civil aviation authorities. They help reduce duplication of activity and aim for mutual acceptance of certificates.  
In addition to airworthiness certification, BASAs, MoUs and W as provide for bilateral 
cooperation across other areas of aviation, including maintenance, flight operations, and 
environmental certification.  
For aircraft certification and maintenance, additional implementation procedures will cover specific issues such as design approval, production acceptance, export airworthiness approval, post -design approval activities, technical cooperation and maintenance.  
For further information on Bilateral agreements please refer to the CAA website: Bilateral-agreements   
1.2.8.  Civil and Military Regulations  
In the United Kingdom, there are two regulatory regimes: civil and military. Military requirements are a matter for the Ministry o f Defence. A military aircraft for this purpose 
includes any aircraft which the Secretary of State for Defence has issued a certificate stating that it must be treated as a military aircraft.  
1.2.9.  Additional Legal Considerations  
UAS Operators and Remote Pilots  must not break other relevant laws when operating 
UAS. UAS regulations and CAA authorisations only primarily address the flight safety 
aspects of UAS operations.  
Nothing in these operating principles or any CAA authorisations constitute a permission for 
UAS operators or flyers to disregard other laws whilst operating and flying a UA. This 
means the UAS Operator and Remote P ilot must always be mindful of other legitimate 
legal interests and laws when operating and flying UAS.  
landowners to operate from their land, and any flight within the vicinity of sites of special scientific interest (SSSIs). Where a flight may take place over an SSSI, operators and 
remote pilots should co ntact the appropriate public body (e.g., Natural England, Natural 
Wales, Nature Scotland, National Trust, Historic Scotland, etc.) for further advice.  
 
1.2.10.  Privacy and Security – Images and other Data Collection Requirements  
The capture of images or other data solely for the use of controlling or monitoring the 
aircraft is not considered to be applicable to the meaning of ‘ a sensor able to capture 
personal data’  in relation to the registration of UAS operators within Article 14 (5)(a) ii of 
the IR.  
UAS operators and remote pilots should be aware that the collection of images of 
identifiable individuals, even inadvertently, when using surveillance cameras mounted on an unmanned aircraft, may be subject to the General Data Protection Regulation and the 
Data Protection Act 2018.  Further information about these regulations and the 
circumstances in which they apply can be obtained from the Information Commissioner’s Office and website: https://ico.org.uk/for -the-public/drones/ . 
UAS operators must be aware of their responsibilities regarding operations from private land and any requirements to obtain the appropriate permission before operati ng from a 
particular site.  They must ensure that they observe the relevant trespass laws and do not unwittingly commit a trespass whilst conducting a flight.
It is the responsibility of every UAS operator to ensure they have appropriate insuranc e 
coverage.  This is a condition of each operational authorisation that is issued by the CAA.  
Assimil ated Regulation (EU)  785/2004 , which came into force on 30 April 2005, requires 
most operators of aircraft, irrespective of the purposes for which they fly, to hold adequate 
levels of insurance in order to meet their liabilities in the event of an accident. This regulation specifies, amongst other things, the minimum levels of third- party accident and 
war risk insurance for aircraft operating into, over or within the EU (including UAS) depending on their Maximum Take- Off Mass (MTOM). Details of the insurance 
requirements can be found on the 
CAA website . 
UK legislation which details insurance requirements is set out in Civil Aviation (Insurance) Regulations 2005
2. 
Article 2(b) of UK Regulation (EU) 785/2004 states that the regulation does not apply to 
‘model aircraft with an MTOM of less than 20kg’, but the term ‘model aircraft’ is not defined 
within the regulation itself.  Therefore,  for the purposes of interpretation within the 
insurance regulation only, its use of the term  ‘model aircraft’ should be taken to mean:  
 “Any unmanned aircraft which is being used for sport or recreational purposes only ”.   
Article 2(g) of UK Regulation (EU) 785/2004 states that the regulation does not apply to 
“aircraft, including gliders, with a MTOM of less than 500 kg, and microlights, which: — are 
used for non- commercial purposes ,”. Therefore, for the purposes of interpretation within 
the insurance regulation only, its use of the term ‘non- commercial’ should be taken to 
mean:  
 “Any unmanned aircraft which is being used for sport or recreational purposes only ”.   
Note:   
For all other purposes, the definition of model aircraft is as set out within CAP 722D.  
For all other types of unmanned aircraft operation, whether commercial or non-
commercial, appropriate cover that meets the requirements of UK Regulation (EU)  
785/2004 is required.
 
2 http://www.opsi.gov.uk/si/si2005/20051089.htm   
The registration requirements for civil UAS are contained within UK Regulation (EU) 
2019/947, Article 14 ; they are in line with the requirements of ICAO Annex 7.  
The registration requirements for unmanned aircraft depend on the category of operation the UAS is within.  
• UAS operated within the Certified category (i.e. the design is subject to 
certification) – each individual UA must be registered.   
• UAS oper ated within the Open or Specific categories  – the UAS operator must 
be registered.  
Note:  
Provision is built in to Article 14 to dis -apply the registration requirement to UAS 
Operators of ‘small control line model aircraft’. These are defined in Article 14(10) 
as: a fixed- wing unmanned aircraft having a MTOM of not more than 7.5 kg and 
which is flown within limits imposed by a restraining device of not more than 25 
metres in length which attaches the aircraft to the surface or to a person on the surface.  
Further information can be found in GM1 Article 14(5A), and AMC1 Article 14(10) of UK Regulation (EU) 2019/947.  
 
Further information on Registration requirements can be found in:  
- GM1 Article 14 (1)  
- GM1 Article 14(5)(a)(ii) 
- AMC1 Article 14(8)  
- GM1 Article 14(8)  
Of UK Regulation (EU) 2019/947 
 
The CAA takes breaches of aviation legislation seriously and will seek to prosecute in 
cases where dangerous and illegal flying has taken place.   
The CAA’s enforcement strategy is designed to reflect the balance of capabilities between the CAA and local Police services.   
The Police often have greater resources, response times and powers of investigation than 
the CAA.  To support this, the CAA has agreed with the Police, in a signed Memorandum 
of Understanding that the Police will take the lead in dealing with UAS misuse incidents, 
particularly at public events, that may contravene aviation safety legislation or other relevant criminal legislation.  Please report any misuse of UAS to your local Police force.  
The CAA’s remit is limited to safety and also to investigate where someone is operating, or 
has operated, in a manner that is not in accordance with their operational authorisation. 
This does not include concerns  over privacy or broadcast rights.  
Breaches of Aviation Regulation legislation must be reported directly to:  
Investigation and Enforcement Team  
Civil Aviation Authority  
Aviation House Beehive Ring Road  
Crawley  
West Sussex  
RH6 0YR  
E-mail: ietmailbox@caa.co.uk
   
Privacy issues are covered by the Information Commissioners Office (ICO) and will not be 
dealt with by the CAA.  
If you have any concerns about UAS being used in your area, either from a safety or privacy perspective, contact your local police on 101.  
CAA Enforcement guidance can be found here Enforcement -and-prosecutions
. 
 
 
  

 
2.1. Operating Principles  
2.1.1.  Visual line of sight operations (VLOS)  
When operating within VLOS, the remote pilot must be able to see the UA at all times 
during the flight, sufficiently well to be able to maintain control of it. The maximum distance from the remote pilot at which this can be safely achieved depends on a number of factors and may change from flight to flight.  
When operating within the open category, or when set out within the terms of an 
operational authorisation for the specific category, the UA must be operated within visual 
line of sight of the remote pilot (VLOS).  
A VLOS Operation is defined within UK Regulation (EU) 2019/947 as:  
‘a type of UAS operation in which, the remote pilot is able to maintain continuous 
unaided visual contact with the unmanned aircraft, allowing the remote pilot to control 
the flight path of the unmanned aircraft in relation to other aircraft, people and obstacles for the purpose of avoiding collisions.’  
Maintaining VLOS ensures the remote pilot can monitor the aircraft’s position, orientation, and the surrounding airspace at all times. This is important in order to ensure the UA can be manoeuvred clear of anything that might pose a collision hazard.  
While corrective lenses may be used, the use of binoculars, telescopes, or any other forms of image enhancing devices are not permitted.  
Note:  
Provision is made within UK Regulation (EU) 2019/947 for the use of FPV equipment 
within the Open Category, providing an observer is used.  
The maximum VLOS distance varies for every operation, and will include such considerations as:  
• The size of the aircraft (and its ‘visual conspicuity’)  
• Any lighting onboard the UA to aid in orientation and navigation  
• The weather conditions (fog, sun glare etc.)  
• The remote pilot’s eyesight  
It is for the RP to satisfy themselves, after careful consideration of the above guidance, the 
maximum horizontal distance that can be safely achieved whilst still maintaining unaided 
visual contact with the UA.   
Note:  
It is important to consider additional technical factors which may limit the safe operating 
distance from the RP and the UA during VLOS operations. For example, the C2 link 
capability of the UAS.  
Note:   
It is important to note that the sole use of video aids or telemetry to control the UA does 
not meet the requirements for VLOS.  
2.1.1.1.  VLOS Operating Heights  
Open Category  operations are limited to a maximum distance of 400 feet (120 metres) 
from the closest point of the surface of the earth.    
Note:  
This is not a ‘vertical height’, but a distance between the UA and the closest point on the surface of the earth. See figure 1 below . 
UK Regulation (EU) 2019/947 UAS.OPEN.010 gives two additional height provisions: 
• For UA to be flown up to 15m higher than the height of an ‘artificial obstacle’ , when 
that obstacle is taller than 105m , and the UA is kept within 50m of it.  
• For unmanned sailplanes (with an MTOM less than 10Kg) to be flown at a height 
greater than 120m above the surface of the earth, provided that it is not flown higher than 120m above the remote pilot.  
 
Although other aircraft may fly below this height, the vast majority fly at higher levels.  
 Figure 2- 400ft (120m) separation from surface of the earth  
 
2.1.1.2.  VLOS operations at night  
There are no specific prohibitions to VLOS operations during night -time. The basic VLOS 
principles still apply (i.e., you must be able to see the aircraft and the surrounding airspace).   
Any applications for operational authorisations which include VLOS flight at night will be 
expected to include a ‘night operations’ section within the operations manual which details 
the operating procedures to be followed and should include items such as:  
• daylight reconnaissance and site safety assessment of the surrounding area; 
• identification and recording of any hazards, restrictions and obstacles ; 
• illumination of the launch site; 
• aircraft lighting/illumination requirements ; 
• weather limitations for operation. 
2.1.2.  Avoidance of other aircraft  
There are no right -of-way rules set out in regulation between unmanned aircraft and oth er 
airspace users, however it is likely that the unmanned aircraft remote pilot will identify other airspace users before they identify the unmanned aircraft, and therefore the remote pilot will usually be first to manoeuvre away from any conflicting aircr aft.  
UK Regulation ( EU) 2019/947 sets out, in UAS.OPEN.060 (2)(b), that: the remote pilot 
shall maintain a thorough visual scan of the airspace surrounding the unmanned aircraft in 
discontinue the flight if the operation poses a risk to other aircraft, people, animals, environment or property .  
 Note:  
A similar requirement is set out within UAS.SPEC.060(3)(b), for the Specific Category.  
 
Although this places a responsibility for collision avoidance on the remote pilot, it does not 
absolve other airspace users from their own collision avoidance responsibilities. Neither does it imply any ‘right of way’ over UAS, by other airspace users.  
Remote pilots should be aware that their unmanned aircraft are generally difficult, if not 
impossible, to see from another aircraft until they are extremely close- particularly when 
flying within urban areas.  
Although many aerodromes are protected by FRZs , many unlicensed helicopter landing 
sites also exist, including hospital helipads . Such aircraft may loiter at low -level or land and 
take off unexpectedly. All of these types of helicopter operations may therefore be affected 
by VLOS operations particularly  when approaching to land or departing from a site; UAS 
operators and remote pilots must take active precautionary measures to avoid affecting 
the safety of other airspace users , either by requiring them to take avoiding action, 
disrupting a mission or distraction (for example, aborting an air ambulance landing due to a UAS sighting).   
A NOTAM is generally not required to be issued for VLOS operations due to the typically 
small scale, duration and operating limitations of VLOS flights. The potential need for NOTAM action must  form part of the operator’s risk assessment process, particularly 
above 400ft (120m), outside of controlled airspace or when several unmanned aircraft will be operating together.  
2.1.3.  Beyond visual line of sight operations (BVLOS)  
Operation of an unmanned aircraft beyond a distance where the remote pilot is able to 
respond to or avoid other airspace users by direct visual means (i.e. the remote pilot’s observation of the unmanned aircraft) is considered to be a BVLOS operation.  
Unmanned aircraft intended for BVLOS operations will require either:  
• A technical  capability which has been accepted as being at least equivalent to the 
ability of a pilot of a manned aircraft to ‘see and avoid’ potential conflictions.  This is referred to as a Detect and Avoid (DAA) capability.   Further details regarding 
DAA can be found at 3.6.  
Note:   
Regulation (EU) 923/2012: The Standardised European Rules of the Air 
(SERA) chapter 2 (avoidance of collisions), as adjusted by Rule 8 of the 
Rules of the Air Regulations 2015 (Rules for avoiding aerial collisions);  
or 
• An operational  mitigation, which reduces the likelihood of encountering another 
aircraft to an acceptable level, which may be achieved either using airspace segregation, or another suitable method of ensuring such segregation.  
Note :  
The primary means of achieving BVLOS operations without using a technical DAA capability, is using airspace segregation. It is not current CAA policy to accept a 
probabilistic safety argument based on historic traffic data as the sole component of a 
safety argument.   
 
EVLOS)  
In some cases, the requirement for the remote pilot to maintain direct visual contact with 
the unmanned aircraft can be addressed via other non- technical ‘visual observation’ 
methods or procedures while still achieving the key responsibilities of avoiding collisions.   
These are still classed as BVLOS operations, however they may also be referred to as 
‘Extended Visual Line of Sight’ or EVLOS operations. When operating ‘EVLOS’, collision 
avoidance is still achieved through the ‘unaided visual observation’ of a human, through 
the use of additional observers visually ‘scanning’ a block of airspace for conflicts while 
maintaining VLOS with the UA.  
With the exception of two provisions made in the regulation (see GM1 Article 4( 1)(d) of UK 
Regulation (EU) 2019/947) , EVLOS operations may only be conducted within the Specific 
category (see 2.2 below) under the terms of an operational authorisation issued by the CAA and based on a risk assessment .  Factors taken into consideration must include:  
• the procedures for avoiding collisions;  
• the size of the unmanned aircraft being used ;  
• the colour of and markings  on the unmanned aircraft ;  
• any additional aids to observation;  
• meteorological conditions and visibility, including background conditions (cloud / blue sky);  
• the use of deployed observers, including suitable communication methods within the team; and 
• operating range limits - suitable radio equipment must be fitted in order to be able 
to effect positive control over the UA at all times.  
2.1.4.  Protection of Third Parties 
While the primary focus of the UAS Regulations is on the protection of persons, UAS operators and remote pilots must also bear in mind their responsibilities towards vehicles, vessels and structures while flying, even if they are unoccupied.  
Under ANO 2016 article 241, ‘ no person may recklessly or negligently cause or permit an 
aircraft to endanger any person or property’ .  This article applies  to the endangerment of 
manned aircraft with an unmanned aircraft .  
Similarly, ANO 2016 article 240 requires that ‘ a person must not recklessly or negligently 
act in a manner likely to endanger an aircraft,  or any person in an aircraft ’.  Although this 
exception in article 23 – i.e., the unmanned aircraft itself  cannot be ‘endangered’), its 
requirements still apply to UAS operators and remote pilots , in relation to the 
endangerment of other  aircraft with a UA. 
Key points to note when considering the safety of third parties:  
• Fly cautiously  and with the expectation that control of the UA could be lost 
without notice  
• Reduce the harmful characteristics of the unmanned aircraft to people  
• Minimise the UA’s mass wherever possible or use a smaller/lighter UA  
• Use a UA with design features that reduce harm  
• Do not fly at excessive speeds when close to people  
• Check that the UA is in a safe condition to fly  
• Consider the environmental factors that may aggravate the potential for loss of 
control or loss of propulsion  
• Consider the use of additional operating personnel to warn uninvolved people 
immediately following any loss of control or propulsion  
• Make use of any available technology or safety features which may reduce the 
risk of harm if control is lost  
2.1.5.  Uninvolved persons  
The primary focus for UAS operations is the protection of people that are not a part of the operation (i.e., third parties). Within the UAS regulations, they are referred to as ‘uninvolved persons’.  
The regulation sets out that ‘uninvolved persons’ means an individual, or group of individuals, who either:  
 are not, in any way, participating in the UAS Operation; or  
 have not received clear  instructi ons and safety precautions  from the RP, the UAS 
Operator  or a person nominated by the UAS Operator, to  follow throughout 
the operation and in  the event the UAS exhibits  any unplanned behaviour.  
 
A person is considered to be ‘participating’ in the operation, if they are the UAS Operator, 
or acting on behalf of the UAS Operator, for example, the remote pilot, or another member of the flight or supporting ground crew.  
 
The overflight of uninvolved people is possible in some circumstances within the Open and 
Specific category of operation.  
The overflight of uninvolved people should always be minimised where possible, to reduce 
the risk of a collision with them, following  a loss of control, to as low as reasonably 
practicable.  
This risk can be reduced by lowering the likelihood of such a collision occurring, and the 
severity  of the collision.  
Factors that a UAS Operator and remote pilot should take to reduce the likeliho od, 
include:  
 Only flying directly over people when absolutely necessary to achieve the aim of the flight (and when legal to do so) and minimise the time doing so.  
 Consider remote pilot experience and fatigue level.  
 When flying over uninvolved people remote pilots should, whenever reasonably possible, maintain some horizontal separation between their aircraft and those uninvolved people. The extent of this horizontal distance is for the remote pilot to 
judge based on any relevant factors such as the prevailing weather conditions 
and the flight characteristics of the UA and its flight, for example;  
o Wind direction- avoid flying ‘upwind’ of uninvolved people, a strong wind 
may blow the aircraft towards them as it falls.  
o Think before flying towards people, especially at higher speeds as the aircraft’s trajectory while falling may present a danger to people on the ground.  
 Consider the nature and temperament of uninvolved people being overflown and how they may react to the presence of an unmanned aircraft.  
 Keep the UA maintained in accordance with the manufacturer’s guidance.  
 Maintain an appropriate margin of confidence in the flying time that can be provided by the existing battery power/charge to carry out the intended operation and cope with unexpected issues.  
 Consider environmental factors that may increase the chance of a loss of control, including;  
o Flight in precipitation – which may suddenly prevent the UA from operating  
o Sources of interference with the Command and Control link  
o Wind speed and turbulence – which could affect the remote pilot’s ability 
to control the aircraft precisely and increase its power consumption.  
 
Factors that a UAS Operator and remote pilot should take to reduce the severity , include:  
 Minimise the mass of the aircraft while flying, in order to reduce the kinetic 
energy that may be transferred in a collision;  
o If possible, use a lighter UA.  
o The UA should only carry loads that are necessary.  
 Use UA with design features that reduce harm following collision with a person.  
 Do not fly at excessive speeds when close to people.  
Note:  
This guidance replaces that contained within Safety Notice SN -2020/002, which is now 
cancelled.   
2.1.5.2.  Assemblies of people 
Assemblies of people are defined as: gatherings where persons are unable to move away 
due to the density of the people present . 
There are no strict numbers defined above which a ‘group of people’ would turn into an ‘assembly ’ of people as different situations would result in different conclusions.  An 
assembly must be evaluated qualitatively, based on the ability of people within that group to ‘escape’ from any risk posed by the UAS operation.  
Examples of assemblies of people may include the following, (this  is not an exhaustive 
list): 
• sport ing, cultural, religious or political events;  
• music festivals and concerts ; 
• marches and ralli es; 
• parties, carnivals and fêtes . 
2.1.6.  The 1:1 rule 
The ‘1:1 rule’ is a principle which can be used to identify when the minimum separation distance from uninvolved people may need to be increased, and by how much.  It is based 
on the relationship between the UA’s height and its distance from the uninvolved person 
(the 1:1 line).  
than the height of the aircraft. The higher the aircraft, the further it will travel should it 
suffer a catastrophic failure, and therefore the higher the likelihood of it colliding with 
uninvolved people, and so the separation distance must be increased (or the height 
reduced). This is so that, in the event of a propulsion failure, the UA is not likely to fall in an area with uninvolved people present.  
 
Figure 3- 1:1 Rule  
2.1.7.  Vehicles, vessels and structures  
Although there are no specific separation distances from vessels, vehicles and structures 
within the regulations, in many cases these will still have persons inside them who need to 
be protected.  For example, the ‘endangerment’ regulation in the Air Navigation Order 
(article 241) - it is an offence to ‘endanger’ such property with an unmanned aircraft . 
Additionally, the overall security and privacy situation must also be considered.  There may 
be buildings in the area where it would be inadvisable, from a security or privacy 
standpoint, to be flying close to without first obtaining permission to do so.  
2.1.8.  Congested areas  
As part of the aim to protect uninvolved persons, flights within areas that are used for residential, commercial, industrial or recreational purposes (i.e. areas that are densely 
populated or likely to be occupied by large numbers of persons) have additional 
operational limitations placed on them.   
UAS flights within these ‘congested’ areas may only be undertaken:  
• by UA that have been built to specific product safety standards;  
Note: in both of the cases above, additional remote pilot competency 
requirements may also be required.  
or, 
• if authorised by the CAA.  
2.1.9.  Tethered UAS operations 
A tethered UAS operation is one where the unmanned aircraft remains securely attached 
(tethered) via a physical link to a person, the ground or an object at all times while it is 
flying.  The tether normally takes the form of a flexible wire or a cable and may also 
include the power supply to the aircraft .  
Operations with a tethered UAS can be used as an efficient solution in a number of cases, for example where an operating area is restricted, or when the required flight time exceeds the normal endurance of a free flying battery powered aircraft.  
Tethered UAS that are powered and have a mass greater than 1kg are subject to the 
same regulatory framework  as all other unmanned aircraft (i.e. the requirements set out 
within UK Regulation (EU) 2019/947).   But the fact that the operation is tethered can be 
used as a significant mitigation factor when applying for an operating authorisation, thus greatly simplifying the overall process.  
2.1.9.1.  Tethered small unmanned aircraft  
 
Tethered UAS with a mass of 1kg or less are not subject to the requirements within UK 
Regulation (EU) 2019/947, but are instead addressed within article 265E of the ANO as ‘tethered small unmanned aircraft’.   
The overall effect of article 265E is that the requirements for the operation of tethered small unmanned aircraft are matched with the equivalent Open category ‘untethered’ unmanned aircraft.  This is achieved by:  
• If the tethered small unmanned aircraft’s mass is:  
• Less than 250g – the requirements for flights conducted in subcategory 
A1 apply.  
• 250g or more (up to 1kg) – the requirements for flights conducted in 
subcategory A3 apply.  
• Permission from the CAA is required to operate outside of these requirements 
Regulation (EU) 2019/947). 
• When considering the points above, any references to ‘unmanned aircraft’ or 
‘UAS’ should be read as if they include a tethered system as well.  
• No dropping of materials, or carriage of dangerous goods without permission from the CAA. 
• Maximum tether length is 25m, unless in accordance with a permission from the CAA.  
• An offence is committed if the above are contravened.  
2.1.10.  Swarming UAS operations  
Guidance regarding VLOS rotary wing UAS swarming operations can be found within CAP 
722E . 
 
UAS operations are regulated in a manner that is proportionate to the level of risk that the 
individual operation presents.  This ‘risk and operation centric’ approach means that each 
operation will fall into one of three operating categories as described in 2.2.1, 2.2.2 and 2.2.3 below.  
2.2.1.  Open Category  
The Open category covers operations that present a low risk to third parties.  Operations within this category are conducted within a set of basic and pre- defined limitations and do 
not require any further authorisation by the CAA.  The Open category is sub- dived into 
three further subcategories.  
2.2.1.1.  Operational boundaries  
Open category operations are bounded by a number of  factors, all of which must be met:  
• the maximum take- off mass/flying weight of the unmanned aircraft must be less 
than 25kg; and  
• the unmanned aircraft must be operated within VLOS (unless operating in accordance with the procedure described in GM1 Article 4(1)(d) of UK Regulation 
(EU) 2019/947); and 
• the unmanned aircraft must not be flown further than 400 feet (120 metres) from 
the closest point of the surface of the earth (unless operating in accordance with 
the procedure described in UK Regulation (EU) 2019/947 UAS.OPEN.010 (3) ; 
and 
• Only one UA may be operated at any one time.  
• The UA must not drop any material during the flight. See AMC1 Article 4(1)(f) of UK Regulation (EU) 2019/947 for further information.  
2.2.1.2.  Open Category subcategories  
The Open category is then further divided down into three operational ‘subcategories’, primarily based on the proximity of the unmanned aircraft to uninvolved persons while in flight, as follows:  
• A1 (fly ‘over’ people)  – Operations in subcategory A1 can be conducted within 
‘congested’ areas (as defined in s ection 2.1.8) and may be carried out over 
uninvolved people ( other than A1 transitional UAS) , but not assemblies of 
people. Any overflight of people should be avoided if possible and kept to a 
o UAS less than 250g, that  is privately built or  placed on the market before 1 
Jan 2026 ( under the ‘Legacy’ provisions) ; or 
o A1 Transitional  UAS with a mass less than 500g, provided the remote pilot 
holds an A2 CofC certificate  as described in section 5.2.3.1, and does not 
overfly uninvolved people – only until 01 January  2026. 
• A2 (Fly ‘close to’ people)  (under the transitional provisions ) – Operations in 
subcategory A2 can be conducted ‘near’ people with a minimum horizontal 
distance of 50 metres  from uninvolved persons . The remote pilot must have 
successfully completed an additional competency examination (the A2 CofC ), 
and the UAS must be a transitional  UAS,  with a mass less than 2Kg - o nly until 
01 January 2026.  
• A3 (Fly ‘far from’ people)  – This category covers the more general types of 
unmanned aircraft operations.  The unmanned aircraft may only be flown in 
areas where no uninvolved person may be endangered by the unmanned 
aircraft, and may not be flown within 150 metres horizontally of areas that are 
used for residential, commercial, industrial or recreational purposes.  
2.2.1.3.  Open Category product Requirements  
A set of product requirements has been introduced within UK Regulation (EU) 2019/945. 
Currently, it is not possible for manufact ures to comply with these requirements in the UK, 
due to the lack of designated standards, or Conformity Assessment Bodies, established under this regulation. As such, there are currently no UAS in the UK which are class marked in accordance with this regulation. For this reason, the CAA has removed class 
marking guidance from this document, for simplicity and readability.  
This is subject to a regulatory review to be conducted by the DfT and the CAA in due course.  
UAS which are marked with a class mark, in accordance with the European version of this 
regulation, are not recognised in the UK  as being class marked, and must be flown under 
the other open category provisions (i.e. transition, legacy or non- class marked).  
 
Legacy UAS  
UAS products (which are not privately built) which do not conform to the class markings, 
but which are placed on the market before  01 January 2026 may continue to be used in 
the Open Category in the A1 and A3 subcategory - providing that the unmanned aircraft 
has a MTOM less than 250g (for the A1 subcategory) or 25Kg (for the A3 subcategory).  
New UAS products (which are not privately built) and which are placed on the market on or 
after  1 January 2026 and which do not conform to the class markings described above,  
 
Transitional Arrangements  
In order to manage the transition to the new product standard rules, UK Regulation (EU) 
2019/947 Article 22 sets out transitional provisions that allow certain UAS that don’t meet 
the class marking requirements to continue to be operated in the Open catego ry until 01 
Jan 2026. These are:  
 A1 sub- category: UA less than 500g, and remote pilot must hold an A2 CofC 
certificate. No overflight of uninvolved people.  
 A2 sub- category: UA less than 2Kg, no close than 50m horizontally from uninvolved 
persons, remote pilot must hold an A2 CofC certificate.  
 
2.2.1.4.  Open Category – Interpretation of mass and weight  
The MTOM includes all the elements  on board the UA, including  the motors, propellers,  
electronic  equipment and antennas, batteries/fuel,  oil and all other fluids  and the payload,  
including  sensors  and their ancillary  equipment.  
Privately built UA, and some off the shelf UA  do not have a MTOM defined. In this case, 
the mass of the aircraft at the time of take- off should be used instead, when interpreting 
the term ‘MTOM’ within the regulation. Although the UAS Regulations refer  to ‘maximum 
take- off mass’ (MTOM) throughout, this term creates some confusion when referring to 
home- built or other non-class marked U A where an MTOM has not been defined by the 
manufacturer.  
Take- off Mass (Article 22)  
The term ‘take- off mass’ is also used when referring to non- class marked aircraft, but only 
within one article (Article 22 – transitional arrangements) and the term is not specifically 
defined. For these aircraft, any reference to ‘take- off mass should be taken to mean the 
mass of the UA  at the point of take- off for that particular flight 
2.2.2.  Specific Category  
The Specific category covers operations that present a greater risk than that of the Open category, or where one or more elements of the operation fall outside the boundaries of 
 
3   UAS.OPEN.020 (for A1) and UAS.OPEN.040 (for A3) set out that UAS must either be class marked, 
privately built, or meet the requirements of Article 20, which sets out that ‘legacy UAS’ , i.e. those placed 
on the market before 1 Jan 2026 may continue to be used in the A1 and A3 subcategory after this date, 
providing the conditions of Article 20 are met .   
The key element of the Specific category is that the UAS operator is required to hold an 
operational authorisation, which has been issued by the CAA.  
This operational authorisation will be based on the CAA’s evaluation of a safety risk 
assessment that has been produced by the UAS operator or, in some circumstances, has 
been ‘pre- defined’ and published by the CAA  as a pre- defined risk assessment (PDRA). 
See CAP 722H for more information on PDRAs, and CAP 722A for further information on the risk assessment process, and development of the OM .   
The operational authorisation document sets out the conditions and limitations of the operation.   
In order to obtain an operational authorisation, the UAS operator must conduct a risk 
assessment of the proposed operation and submit this as part of the application.  This 
must  
• outline the proposed operation (‘what’ the operator wants to do);  
• describe the operational process that will be used (‘how’ the operator will do it);  
• describe the technical aspects of the UAS (‘what’ the operator will do it with);  
• demonstrate that it can be done safely (provide a risk assessment/safety case).  
Details on how to make an application for an operational authorisation can be found on the CAA’s UAS webpages www.caa.co.uk/uas  .  
Operational authorisation holders are subject to regulatory oversight by the CAA; further details are provided at 1.1.4.  
Note:   
An operational authorisation issued by the CAA only addresses the flight safety aspects of the UAS operation in the UK and does not constitute permission to disregard the legitimate 
interests of other statutory bodies such as the Police and Emergency Services, Highways 
England, Data Commission, Ofcom or local authorities.  
2.2.2.1.  Specific Category – Use of certified UA or certified equipment  
Certified UA and/or certified equipment may be used for Specific category operations as a means of risk reduction or as a mitigating measure in the risk assessment.  
‘Certified equipment’  is considered to be any equipment  for which the relevant  design 
organisation has demonstrated compliance with the applicable certification  specifications  
and received  a form of recognition from the CAA  that attests  such compliance (e.g.,  a TSO 
approval).  
The use of certified UA or equipment does not mean that the whole flight operation is then 
transferred to the Certified category, but if the certification of those products is relied upon 
routine maintenance, scheduled servicing and the qualifications of the organisations and personnel carrying out those duties) must also be complied wit h. 
2.2.2.2.  Risk assessments 
The authorisation process (and thus the authorisation requirements) aims to ensure that the public and other airspace users are not exposed to unacceptable risk introduced by UAS operations.  
Each application for an operational authorisation (other than one based on a PDRA) must be accompanied by a risk assessment  carried out by the UAS Operator . 
Further guidance on the preparation and submission of risk assessments is provided in CAP 722A
 . 
2.2.2.3.  Pre-defined Risk Assessments  
A PDRA is a shortened set of prescriptive conditions that must be complied with by a UAS 
operator in order to conduct a pre- determined type of operation.  
In these cases, the CAA conducts  a risk assessment for the operation, to generate a list of 
mitigations. These mitigations are then published as a series of requirements and limitations . The Operator must demonstrate compliance with these mitigations within the 
operations manual, as part of a ‘shortened’ application for an operational authorisation.   
 
Individual PDRAs  that are available for use within the UK are listed in CAP 722H .  
 
Note 1:  
The UAS operator must still apply to the CAA for an Operational Authorisation in order to 
fly under the terms of a PDRA.  
Note 2:  
PDRAs that have been published by EASA for use within the EU are not applicable within 
the UK.  
 
2.2.2.4.  Standard Scenarios (STS)  
The concept of ‘standard scenarios’ is omitted in the Assimilated Regulation (EU)  
2019/947 and therefore will not be used in the UK for the foreseeable future. 
2.2.2.5.  The Light UAS Certificate (LUC)  
UK Regulation (EU) 2019/947 Article 5 and Part C of the Annex, makes provision for an 
privileges to UAS operators, including the possibility of authorising certain elements of their own operations.  
 
Note:   
UAS operators considering the LUC should first contact the CAA in order to discuss their 
options and the next steps before making an application.  The CAA is currently reviewing 
the LUC concept, and will provide further AMC and GM to this article, in due course.  
 
2.2.2.6.  Model Aircraft  
Further information on the operation of model aircraft can be found in Appendix A AMC/GM to UK Regulation (EU) 2019/947.  
2.2.3.  Certified Category  
The Certified category covers operations that present an equivalent risk to that of manned 
aviation; because of this they are be subjected to the same regulatory regime (i.e., 
certification of the unmanned aircraft, certification of the UAS operator, licensing of the 
remote pilot).  
UK regulations relating to the Certified category are still being developed and are not yet 
published.   Until unique UAS regulations are available, the principles set out in the relevant 
manned aviation regulations for airworthiness, operations and licensing will be used as the basis for regulating the certified category.  
2.2.3.1.  Boundary with the Specific Category  
UAS operations in the ‘certified’ category include operations with a high risk.  Being dependent on the safety risk assessment process, and the nature and risk of the type of operation concerned, the boundary between ‘specific’ and ‘certified’ category 
cannot be expressed purely in terms of  mass of the UA.  
The combined effect of Article 6 of UK Regulation (EU) 2019/947 Article 40 of  UK 
Regulation (EU) 2019/945 is that UAS operations must be conducted in the ‘certified’ 
category when they:   
• Involve a UA with a characteristic dimension of 3m or more being flown over 
assemblies of people; or,  
• involve the transport of people; or,  
• involve the carriage of dangerous goods, that may result in high risk for third parties in case of accident.  
category, must instead be conducted in the certi fied category.  This would be the case 
when, having considered the risk assessment provided by the UAS operator,  the CAA 
considers that the risk of the operation cannot be adequately mitigated without:  
• the design, production and maintenance of the UAS being certified; and 
• the UAS operator being certified; and, 
• the remote pilot being licensed (unless the UAS is autonomous) .
 
This section outlines the operating principles associated with UAS flights both in 
segregated and non- segregated airspace within the UK.  
2.3.1.  Basic principles  
UK aviation legislation is designed to enable the safe and efficient operation of all aircraft in all classes of airspace. UAS operators must work within this same regulatory framework.   
The table below sets out the basic airspace requirements for UAS.  
 Controlled Airspace  
(Class A -E) Danger, Restricted, Prohibited 
Areas  (including FRZs around 
aerodromes and space sites)  
(EG D, EG R, EG RU, EG P)  
Open 
Category 
Operations Not Applicable 
Accommodated through the operating limitations 
of the Open category  Applicable  
These are usually applicable to all 
aircraft, including unmanned aircraft. 
Full details for restricted and 
prohibited areas can be found within 
the SI that sets out t he airspace 
restriction. Some areas are only 
applicable to unmanned aircraft.  
Specific 
Category 
Operations Controlled airspace requirements are generally 
not applied to VLOS UAS operations that take 
place below 400ft . 
Air Navigation Service Providers ( ANSPs ) 
responsible for the management of controlled 
airspace may request to be notified about UAS 
operations within their airspace, above 400ft . 
This will be set out within the AIP (section ENR 
2.1). This is not a ‘permission’ request, but a 
notification.  
Information provided by the ANSP, following 
such a notification, must be taken into account 
by the UAS Operator.  
Operators and remote pilots must be clear within 
their procedures on how and when  to engage Applicable  
These are usually applicable to all 
aircraft, including unmanned aircraft. 
Full details for restricted and 
prohibited areas can be found within 
the SI that sets out the airspace 
restriction. Some areas are only 
applicable to unmanned aircraft.  
within controlled airspace.  
Certified 
category 
Operations The same requirements that relate to manned aircraft are applicable  
Table 1- Basic airspace requirements as applied to individual operating category  
Note:  
Where a requirement exists, as set out within an Operational Authorisation, or within an 
operation manual, for the notification of a Specific  Category flight to an air traffic service 
(ATS) unit, making such a notification does not imply the provision of any service, or ‘clearance’. Neither does it mean any separation service is provided by the ATS unit to the UA against other aircraft, or to other aircraft against the UA. Should the ATS unit pass the 
remote pilot any information during the notification process, the remote pilot should make 
use of this information when assessing the risk of the operation. UAS operators are reminded of their obligations under ANO Article 240, to not recklessly or negligently act in 
a manner likely to endanger an aircraft; as such, use of any such information provided by 
an ATS unit during the notification of a flight, should be used to inform the UAS Operators when making operational decisions.  
In order to integrate with other airspace users, UAS operators must ensure that their operation does not pose any additional risk to other airspace users .  A UA must not be 
flown if the appropriate safety provisions cannot be made or if such operations would have 
an unreasonably negative impact on other airspace users.  
2.3.2.  UAS Operations within Segregated Airspace  
The UK uses Danger Areas as the primary method of airspace segregation for UAS operations, where required- for example, BVLOS operations .  
For flights within segregated airspace, whilst some restrictions may still apply, an 
unmanned aircraft will generally be given freedom of operation within the bounds of the 
allocated airspace, subject to any agreed procedures and safety requirements.  
A specific category operational  authorisation to operate will take into account the risks 
associated with any unintended excursion from the allocated airspace and it will also consider the possibility of airspace infringements. In addition, measures that may be put in 
place to enhance the safety of UAS activities will also be considered in the authorisation 
process.  
While segregated airspace, by its nature, provides exclusive use of that airspace to the UAS activity, other aircraft may still infringe such airspace boundaries. In order to enhance 
the safety of UAS operations, the following constraints may be imposed:  
UAS flights and to provide a service to them and to other aircraft operating in the vicinity of the segregated airspace;  
• Communications are to be maintained between the ATS provider and the remote pilot.   
Procedures are to be put in place for, amongst others, emergency recovery, loss of control link and the avoidance of infringing aircraft.  
Until BVLOS UAS can comply with the requirements for flight in non -segregated airspace, 
one-off or occasional BVLOS UAS flights outside permanently established segregated 
airspace (i.e. DAs) may be accommodated through the establishment of Temporary Danger Areas (TDAs). see section  2.3.2.1 below.   
Note:  
An operation within segregated airspace that also falls within the Specific category, must 
still be authorised by the CAA. An airspace sponsor may not unilaterally authorise an 
operation that falls within the Specific category.  
2.3.2.1.  Temporary Danger Areas (TDA ) 
It is recognised that there may be occasions when UAS flights are planned to take place outside an established DA; in these cases, one or more TDAs could be established to temporarily provide the appropriate segregation.  Although the use of TDAs offers a 
flexible tool for segregating specific portions of airspace on a temporary basis, it is important to emphasise that segregation effectively denies the use of airspace to other airspace users . 
TDAs must not be considered to be a convenient ‘catch all’ for  short notice UAS activities 
that can simply be requested, and implemented, without due consideration for other airspace users.  
TDAs will mainly be used for longer term measures, where activities have been properly 
planned and prepared, and adequate time is available for full consideration by  the CAA’s  
Airspace Regulation team along with full promulgation to other airspace users.   
Details regarding the application process to establish a TDA can be found within CAP 1616.   
Any queries relating to TDAs should also be directed to arops@caa.co.uk  .  
2.3.2.2.  TDA Sponsorship  
The requirement for sponsorship of a TDA is identical to that required for any other DA. 
Details regarding DA sponsorship, including Terms of Reference, are contained in the 
following document  SARG Policy: Policy for Permanently Established Danger Areas and 
Temporary Danger Areas   
Prohibited Areas and Restricted Areas , as notified in the AIP (section ENR 5.1)  apply to 
unmanned aircraft (irrespective of their size) as well as manned aircraft. Where approval is 
required to enter these areas, permission must be sought  in accordance with the entry 
requirements as set out in the Statutory Instrument that established the specific area. This is usually described within the ‘remarks’ column of the AIP entry for that piece of airspace, and also within most drone safety apps.  
Danger Areas  also apply to both unmanned, and manned aircraft and are established to 
notify airspace users of activities which may pose a risk to them. Although there is usually 
no specific legal requirement to obtain permission to enter, there is  a legal  requirement to 
ensure it is safe to enter. Contact details can usually be found within the AIP entry, and on 
some drone safety apps.  
2.3.4.  Flight Restriction Zones 
As defined in the ANO, FRZs are established around aerodromes , and space sites . 
2.3.4.1.  Aerodrome Flight Restriction Zones  
Aerodrome Flight Restriction Zones (FRZ) are implemented at the majority of UK 
aerodromes (a complete list can be found in the AIP, and on the DroneSafe Website).  
Their purpose is to enhance safety for other airspace users within the vicinity of an 
aerodrome.  
Aerodrome FRZs are always active.  
In order to operate within an Aerodrome FRZ, permission must be sought from the 
appropriate authority, either the Air Traffic Service unit (ATSU) or the Aerodrome Operator. This may be obtained through an online platform, or directly from the aerodrome. The 
procedure is normally outlined on the aerodrome website, otherwise the ATSU may be 
contacted directly, contact details can be found within the AIP.   
An approval in principle may be issued in advance, which must normally be followed by an 
‘on the day’ approval from the appropriate air traffic service unit, or aerodrome operator. In some cases, a standing agreement may be appropriate, and agreed by both parties, which grants permission on a standing basis for a specific operation.  
Aerodrome FRZs are defined in article 94A of the ANO and comprise three sections:  
• A cylinder, with the same dimensions as the Aerodrome Traffic Zone (ATZ);  
• Runway Protection Zones (RPZs);  
• Additional Boundary Zones.  
2.5 NM radius cylinder which extends to 2000 ft above aerodrome level, centred around the centre point of the longest runway.  
The RPZs are rectangular blocks, starting at the runway threshold and extending out 5 km 
along the extended runway centreline, which are 1 km wide and extend to 2000 ft above aerodrome level.  
The Additional boundary zones exist where a line drawn that is 1km beyond the airfield 
boundary, extends outside of the ATZ. This additional volume is called the ‘additional 
boundary zone’.   This also extends to 2000 ft above aerodrome level.  
 
Figure 4- Gatwick airport Flight Restriction Zone ( correct at time of publication-  presented here for 
illustrative purposes only).  
UAS Operators intending to operate above 400ft (120m) within an FRZ must obtain an 
operational authorisation from the CAA to do so. The air traffic control unit, flight 
information service unit or aerodrome operator may issue a permission for access to the 
FRZ (at any level), but may not authorise operations in the Specific category (e.g. above 
400ft).   
In order to mitigate safety risks associated with UAS operating within an FRZ and 
interacting with manned aircraft, the following NOTAM action is strongly recommended 
by the CAA. Any operation within the specific category will include such a requirement 
within the conditions of the authorisation.  
In the case that FRZs overlap with each other, or with other airspace, then permission 
 
 
 Within Operating Hours of Air Traffic Service Unit  
(Air Traffic Control, Aerodrome Flight Information Service 
or Air Ground Radio service)  Outside Operating Hours of Air Traffic Service Unit  
(Air Traffic Control, Aerodrome Flight Information Service or Air 
Grou nd Radio service)  
 Below 400ft  Above 400ft  Below 400ft  Above 400ft  
ATZ 
Portion of 
FRZ   NOTAM  
(Requested by 
aerodrome via NOTAM 
Office ) NOTAM  
(Requested by aerodrome via 
NOTAM Office) 
 
Portion of 
FRZ 
outside the 
ATZ  NOTAM  
(requested in advance via 
AROps@caa.co.uk) 
  
 NOTAM  
(requested in advance via 
AROps@caa.co.uk) 
 
Table 2- NOTAM Requirement Summary  
Full details of NOTAM and permission requirements for UAS operations within FRZs can 
be found in the AIP (ENR 1.1 Section 4.1.8) . 
2.3.4.2.  Space site Flight Restriction Zones  
Flight restriction zones are established around ‘protected space sites’, as defined in Article 94BA of the Air Navigation Order 2016, as amended.  
A protected space site is defined as:  
- A spaceport  (as defined in the Space Industry Act 2018), which is:  
o  A site from which spacecraft or carrier aircraft are launched or (as the case 
may be) are to be launched; or  
o or a site at which controlled and planned landings of spacecraft take place or (as the case may be)  are to take place; or  
- An installation at sea , at which controlled and planned landings of spacecraft take 
place or are to take place, which can be moved from place to place without major dismantling or modification  
A site which is coincident with a certif ied, national licenced or government aerodrome is 
not a protected space site (and is instead protected by an aerodrome FRZ).  
Permission must be sought for access to a Space site FRZ, from the operator of the space site , for any operation within the FRZ taking place within the Open or 
Specific category. The requirement to obtain permission does not apply to a UAS operated in the Certified category.  
The Space site FRZ comprises a cylinder of airspace extending vertically upwards fr om 
the surface to a height of 2000ft, and with a radius of 5km centred on the mid -point of the 
launch pad with the largest area.   
 
A large number of small aerodromes, private strips and other launch sites exist, which are 
not protected by airspace restrictions, such as FRZs. These can usually be identified from 
VFR charts or alternative online mapping software. Although there may be no requirement to obtain permission to operate near these sites, caution should be exercised when nearby and a good look -out must be kept at all times.  
Remote pilots should remember that a wide variety of other airspace users make use of 
these sites, including many which are unpowered and therefore extremely quiet - such as 
hang gliders, gliders and paragliders. These areas are usually denoted, on VFR flight 
planning charts (and online flight planning software) using the following symbols, which 
refer to: Glider launch sites, aerodromes, aerodromes with gliding, paraglider sites and 
parachuting sites, respectively:  
Figure 5- VFR Chart Symbols 
2.4. International operations  
For the purposes of this guidance, international boundaries are considered to be coincident with lateral FIR/UIR boundaries.  
UK UAS operators planning to operate beyond an international FIR/UIR boundary must 
comply with the regulatory and ATM requirements applicable to the territories over which 
the UAS is flown; these may differ from UK requirements. Guidance on foreign national procedures is to be sought from the appropriate State National Aviation Authority (NAA), 
and any permissions or authorisations are to be sought directly from that NAA.  This 
requirement stems from Article 8 of the Convention on International Civil Aviation ('Chicago Convention'), which states that:  
• "No aircraft capable of being flown without a pilot shall be flown over the territory of a contracting State without special authorisation by that State and in accordance 
with the terms of such an authorisation. Each contracting State undertakes to 
insure (sic
4) that the flight of such an aircraft without a pilot in regions open to civil 
aircraft shall be so controlled as to obviate danger to civil aircraft".  
For the purposes of the Convention the territory of a State shall be deemed to be the land areas and territorial waters adjacent thereto under the sovereignty, suzerainty, protection 
 
4 ICAO’s use of the word ‘insure’ should be read as ‘ensure’  
ICAO requirements concerning the authorisation of UAS flight across the territory of 
another State are published at Appendix 4 to ICAO Annex 2, Rules of the Air.  
2.4.1.  Non-UK operators operating within the UK (third country operators)  
Note 1:   
The term ‘third country’ means any country or territory other than the United Kingdom.  
Third country UAS operators (those that have their principal place of business, are established, or reside outside of the UK)  must first register as a UAS operator in the UK.   
Once registered, they must then comply with the same requirements as set out for an equivalent UK UAS operator.   
Note 2:   
There is scope for valid national documents relating to remote pilot competency or even national operational authorisations to be accepted by the CAA as part of a risk 
assessment.  This is particularly the case where the regulatory environment in the UAS 
operator’s parent country is similar to that of the UK (e.g. EU Member States) . 
2.4.2.  Article 41 (3) of the UAS DR makes provision for any third country itself (i.e. the 
State, not individual UAS operators) to ask the CAA for recognition of its own 
certificates or authorisations for the purpose of operating within the UK.  Prior to any recognition of these documents, the CAA will first be required to ensure that those documents provide the same level of safety as their UK equivalents. UK operators 
operating outside of  the UK  
UK UAS Operators wishing to operate outside the UK must comply with the requirements 
that are set out for UAS operations within that State.  In the first instance, operators should 
consult the guidance documentation that has been prepared by the relevant NAA.  
Note:  
Although the UK operates a very similar regulatory framework to that within the EU, there 
are regulatory differences, and the UK is considered a third country to the EU. UK 
Operators must comply with the applicable regulatory requirements of the state they  are 
operating within. An easy access format of the applicable EU regulations can be found 
here. The National Aviation Authority (NAA) of the EU State where a UK UAS operator first  
operator must register within this Member State and deal with the ‘parent NAA’ for all certificates, operational authorisations, declarations etc. Access to the websites of 
individual EU Member States, including a link to their ‘drones’ webpages, can be obtained via this link EASA Light -MS . 
 
Dangerous goods may only be carried in the Specific and Certified categories of operation.  
Dangerous goods guidance is linked at the end of this section.  
2.5.1.  Operating category – applicability to dangerous goods  
Open category  – dangerous goods must not be carried in the Open category (UK 
Regulation (EU) 2019/947 Article 4, paragraph 1(f)).  
Specific category  – danger ous goods may be carried in the Specific category unless 
assessed as a high risk for third parties in case of acc ident (UK Regulation (EU) 2019/947 
Article 6). A Dangerous goods permit is required, as a condition of the operational 
authorisation.  
Certified category  – danger ous goods can be carried in the Certified category ( UK 
Regulation (EU) 2019/947 Article 6).  
2.5.2.  A pp lication requirements 
Applications to carry dangerous goods are processed by a separate Dangerous Goods 
Team within the CAA and a different process is followed.  Therefore, UAS operators must make a separate Dangerous Goods application to their application  for an operational 
authorisation.  
These applications can be submitted at the same time.  
Application for operational authorisation – apply to the UAS Unit using the established 
procedure detailed in 2.3.1.  
Application for approval to carry dangerous goods  – f ollow the procedure outlined 2.7.2.1 
below.  
UAS operators must  refer to the CAA dangerous goods approvals webpage  for the most 
up-to-date information and to ensure all application requirements are met  and then:  
• Complete CAA Form  SRG 2807  
• Submit the appropriate fee using Payment Form  SRG 2812  and send to the 
Dangerous Goods Office 
• Details of costs can be found in the CAA Scheme of Charges - Air Operator and 
Police Air Operator Certificates  
CAP2248  contains further guidance on the carriage of dangerous g oods by RPAS.  
 
This section offers guidance to industry on how to implement and satisfy the requirements 
for security through all UAS lifecycle activities (i.e. initial concept, development, operation 
and maintenance and decommissioning). In this context, security refers to the security of the unmanned aircraft, including both physical and cyber elements.  
UAS operating in non- segregated airspace must not increase the risk to existing airspace 
users and must not deny airspace to them. This policy requires a level of safety and security equivalent to that of manned aviation.  
UAS must have adequate security to protect the system from unauthorised modification, 
interference, corruption or control/command action. These considerations must be taken 
into account during the risk assessment process, outlined in CAP 722A.   
2.6.1.  Security factors for consideration  
2.6.1.1.  Holistic approach 
When considering security for the UAS it is important to take a holistic approach, paying equal cognisance to technical, policy and physical security for the UAS as a whole. 
Utilising this approach will help ensure that issues are not overlooked that may affect security and ultimately safety.  
By utilising proven industry approaches to the protection of confidentiality, integrity and 
availability, the security measures that are applied can benefit the UAS operator by 
assuring availability of service and the integrity and confidentiality of both data and operations.  
2.6.1.2.  Aspects to be addressed 
Security aspects are required to address potential weaknesses to UAS such as employees, location, accessibility, technology, management structure and governance.  
Such security aspects include but are not limited to:  
• The availability of system assets, e.g. ensuring that system assets and information are accessible to authorised personnel or processes without undue delay;  
• Physical security of system eleme nts and assets, e.g. ensuring adequate 
physical protection is afforded to system assets;  
• Procedural security for the secure and safe operation of the system, e.g. 
ensuring adequate policies such as Security Operating Procedures are drafted, 
• Data exchange between system elements, e.g. ensuring the confidentiality and 
integrity of critical assets is maintained during exchanges within the system, over 
communication channels and by other means such as physical media;  
• Accuracy a nd integrity of system assets, e.g. ensuring threats to system assets 
caused by inaccuracies in data, misrouting of messages and software/hardware corruption are minimised, and actual errors are detected;  
• Access control to system elements, e.g. ensuring ac cess to system assets is 
restricted to persons or processes with the appropriate authority and ’need- to-
know’;  
• Authentication and identification to system assets, e.g. ensuring all individuals 
and processes requiring access to system assets can be reliably  identified and 
their authorisation established;  
• Accounting of system assets, e.g. ensuring that individual accountability for 
system assets is enforced so as to impede and deter any person or process, having gained access to system assets, from adversely affecting the system availability, integrity and confidentiality;  
• Auditing and Accountability of system assets e.g. ensure that attempted 
breaches of security are impeded, and that actual breaches of security are 
revealed. All such attempted and actual security incidents must be investigated by dedicated investigation staff and reports produced;  
• Object Reuse of system assets, e.g. ensure that any system resources re-usage, such as processes, transitory storage areas and areas of disk archive storage, maintains availability, integrity and confidentiality of assets;  
• Asset Retention, e.g. ensuring that system assets are securely retained and stored whilst maintaining availability, integrity and confidentiality.  
Any identified and derived requirements would then sit within each identified security 
aspect and be applied (where necessary) to parts of the UAS, e.g. ground based system (including the communications link) and the UA itself. The requirements must be ultimately traced to the overall policy requirements.  
2.6.1.3.  Security process  
Security design, mitigation, evaluation and operational safety process will be assessed in line with the cybersecurity requirement of the UAS Implementing Regulation. 
 
5 The Cyber obligation for UAS in the specific category is identified in Regulation UK (EU) 2019/947 
UAS.SPEC.050 paragraph (iii): measures to protect against unlawful interference and unauthorised 
access.  
Therefore, an OSC will need to evidence how cybersecurity has been considered in the 
following:  
• Organisational Governance and Culture 
• RPAS Maintenance  
• C3 Link Characteristics  
• Operational Procedures  
• Crew Training 
• Safe Design and Operation  
• External Supporting Services  
• Data protection from unintentional and intentional interference  
• 3rd party suppliers security verification and management.  
 
The security design, evaluation and accreditation process will be considered as a factor to the operational scenario, including but not limited to:  
• Applicable flight rules;  
• Aircraft capabilities and performance including kinetic energy and lethal area;  
• Operating environment (type of airspace, overflown population density);  
• Opportunities for attack and desirability.  
The operational scenarios, along with other applicable factors, must be combined with possible weaknesses to the system to determine a measure of perceived risk. A possible security lifecycle for the UAS is shown in Figure 1 and this particular phase is referred to as the ri sk assessment phase of the process.  
Risk management techniques must then be utilised to reduce the perceived risk to an 
acceptable level of residual risk. As shown in Figure 1 this phase is referred to as the risk 
mitigation phase of the process.  
The risk management techniques implemented are verified and evaluated for effectiveness in a regular cycle of ‘action and review’ ensuring optimum effectiveness is maintained throughout the lifecycle. As shown in Figure 1 this phase is referred to as the validation and verification phase of the process.  
Although the approach above is directly applicable to technical security it must be borne in 
mind that this process must be supported by the application of both good physical security 
and procedural security and thes e could be drawn up by interactions between industry, the 
Further guidance can be found in CAP 722A.  
 
Identify Assets - then , for each asset
Assess Threat
 Assess Vulnerabilities
 Assess 
Impact of 
loss
Assess 
Value
(Re) assess likelihood of threats being 
able to cause undesirable impacts by 
exploiting vulnerabilities 
Are (residual ) risks acceptable
Decide how to prioritise risks
Decide how to treat risks
Treat risks (apply countermeasures )
Are risk treatments effective ?
Accept residual risks
Review criteria
Assess business attitude to risk
Develop risk management strategy
Risk
No
No
Yes
Yes
Strategy 
informs
Risk mitigation 
decisions
Accreditation DecisionRisk Assessment
Validation and 
VerificationRisk Mitigation 
 
Figure 6-Security assessment process 
 
 
2.7.1.  UAS Occurrences  
This section describes  the actions to take if there has been an occurrence involving an 
unmanned aircraft, and describes how to report it, and to whom .   
2.7.2.  Latest information  
UAS occurrence reporting is evolving and the CAA may need to make changes to 
occurrence reporting policy and guidance before the next issue of CAP 722. Any relevant 
updates will be published on the RPAS webpage s. 
2.7.3.  The purpose of occurrence reporting  
Occurrence reporting systems are not  established to attribute blame or liability.  
Occurrence reporting systems are established to learn from occurrences, improve  
aviation safety and prevent recurrence.  
The purpose of occurrence reporting is to improve aviation safety by ensuring that relevant 
safety information is reported, collected, stored, protected, exchanged, disseminated and 
analysed. Organisations and individuals with a good air safety culture will report effectively 
and consistently. Every occurrence report is an opportunity to identify root causes and prevent them contributing to accidents where people are harmed.  
The safe operation of UAS is as important as that of manned aircraft. Injuries to third parties, or damage to property, can be just as severe.  Proper investigation of each 
accident, serious incident or other occurrence is necessary to identify causal factors and to 
prevent repetition. Similarly, the sharing of safety related information via good reporting is critical in reducing the number of future occurrences.  
2.7.4.  Who must occurrences be reported to?  
There are two separate reporting requirements, for:  
• The Air Accidents Investigation Branch (AAIB); and  
The Civil Aviation Authority (CAA). It may be necessary to report to one or both. The regulations that describe these requirements are explained, below.  
The applicable regulations are:  
a. UK (EU) Regulation 996/2010  on the investigation and prevention of accidents 
and incidents in civil aviation.  
b. UK (EU) Regulation 376/2014  on the reporting, analysis and follow -up of 
occurrences in civil aviation. 
Note: this regulation was amended by UK (EU) Regulation 2018/1139   on common 
rules in the field of civil aviation (The Basic Regulation).   
c. UK (EU) Implementing Regulation 2015/1018  laying down a list of classifying 
occurrences in civil aviation to be mandatorily reported.  
2.7.6.  O ccurrence r eporting flowcharts  
The flowcharts below explain:  
• What  occurrences need to be reported;  
• Who to report to;  
• How  to report  
There is a flowchart for the open category and another for the specific category. Each 
flowchart contains links to sections in this guidance containing key definitions and other 
information to help understand why and how to report to the AAIB and/or the CA A.  
Yellow boxes mean mandatory reporting is required and green boxes mean reporting is 
voluntary. Voluntary reporting is useful to provide opportunity for safety lessons to be 
learned more widely from an occurrence.  
Note:  
It is often considered that a high level of reporting, and voluntary reporting, is a sign of an engaged air safety culture. 
 
Figure 7- Open Category Occu rrence Reporting Flowchart  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Other 
occurrence  
Serious 
incident  
Accident  
Must  
report to 
the AAIB  
 Did the occurrence 
involve a manned 
aircraft?  
Must  
report to 
the AAIB  
Did the occurrence 
involve a manned 
aircraft?  
Did the occurrence 
result in a fatal  or 
serious injury  or did it 
involve a manned 
aircraft?  
May 
report to 
the CAA 
Must  
report to 
the CAA 
NO 
 YES 
NO 
 YES 
Must  
report to 
the CAA 
May 
report to 
the CAA 
May 
report to 
the CAA 
Must  
report to 
the CAA 
NO 
 YES 
What 
occurrence has 
happened?  
Figure 8- Specific Category Reporting Flowchart  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
Accident  
 Serious 
incident  
Other 
occurrence  
Must  report 
to the CAA 
in 
accordance 
with your 
operational 
authorisation 
Must  
report to 
the AAIB  
Must  
report to 
the AAIB  
AND 
 AND 
Must  report to 
the CAA 
in accordance 
with your 
operational 
authorisation 
Must  report to 
the CAA 
in accordance 
with your 
operational 
authorisation 
What 
occurrence has 
happened?  
The definitions in this section are from UK (EU)  Regulation 376/2014 and UK (EU)  
Regulation 996/2010.  
2.7.7.1.  O ccurrence 
Any safety -related event which endangers or which, if not corrected or addressed, could 
endanger an aircraft, its occupants or any other person and includes in particular an 
accident  or serious incident . 
Accidents and serious incidents are classifications of occurrence.  
2.7.7.2.  Accident  
An occurrence associated with the operation of an aircraft which, in the case of a manned 
aircraft, takes place between the time any person boards the aircraft with the intention of flight until such time as all such persons have disembarked, or in the case of an 
unmanned aircraft, takes place between the time the aircraft is ready to move with the purpose of flight until such time it comes to rest at the end of the flight and the primary propulsion system is shut down , in which:  
a.  a person is fatally or seriously injured as a result of:  
• being in the aircraft, or,  
• direct contact with any part of the aircraft, including parts which have become detached from the aircraft , or, — direct exposure to jet blast, 
except when the injuries are from natural causes, self -inflicted or inflicted 
by other persons, or when the injuries are to stowaways hiding outside the areas normally available to the passengers and crew; or  
b. the aircraft sustains damage or structural failure which adversely affects the structural strength, performance or flight characteristics of the aircraft, and 
would normally require major repair or replacement of the affected 
component, except for engine failure or damage, when the damage is limited 
to a single engine, (including its cowlings or accessories), to propellers, wing 
tips, antennas, probes, vanes, tires, brakes, wheels, fairings, panels, landing 
gear doors, windscreens, the aircraft skin (such as small dents or puncture holes) or minor damages to main rotor blades, tail rotor blades, landing gear, and those resulting from hail or bird strike, (including holes in the radome); or  
c. the aircraft is missing or is completely inaccessible.  
2.7.7.3.  Serious incident  
An incident involving circumstances indicating that there was a high probability of an accident and is associated with the operation of an aircraft, which in the case of a manned 
flight until such time as all such persons have disembarked, or in the case of an unmanned aircraft, takes place between the time the aircraft is ready to move with the purpose of 
flight until such time it comes to rest at the end of the flight and the primary propulsion 
system is shut down.  
2.7.7.4.  Fatal injury  
An injury which is sustained by a person in an accident, and which results in his or her death within 30 days of the date of the accident.  
2.7.7.5.  Serious injury  
An injury which is sustained by a person in an accident and which involves one of the following:  
a. hospitalisation for more than 48 hours, commencing within 7 days from the 
date the injury was received;  
b. a fracture of any bone (except simple fractures of fingers, toes, or nose);  
c. lacerat ions which cause severe haemorrhage, nerve, muscle or tendon 
damage;  
d. injury to any internal organ;  
e. second- or third -degree burns, or any burns affecting more than 5 % of the body 
surface;  
f.  verified exposure to infectious substances or harmful radiation.  
2.7.7.6.  Additional UAS occurrences that must be reported 
In addition to Accidents and Serious Incidents  other, more UAS specific occurrences must 
also be reported should they or a similar occurrence be experienced or observed. These occurrences are listed below but the list is not exhaustive.  
 
When considering whether an occurrence is reportable, you should also take into account 
other situations where the same thing could have happened. For example, the actual occurrence may have been ‘benign’ as it happened in a remote area. However, if the full 
scope of how the aircraft could be operated is taken into account, for example over people, 
could the same occurrence in a different situation result in a more serious outcome? 
Operation of the aircraft  
• Unintentional loss of control  
• Loss of control authority over the aircraft  
• Aircraft landed outside the designated area  
• Aircraft operated beyond the limitations established in the relevant operating 
• Aircraft operated without required licencing, registration or operational 
authorisation  
• Aircraft operated in an unairworthy or unflightworthy condition  
Technical malfunction/failure of the aircraft or command unit  
• Loss of command and control link (C2 link)  
• Battery failure/ma lfunction  
• Powerplant failure  
• Aircraft structural failure (for example, part of the aircraft detaches during operation)  
• Errors in the configuration of the command unit  
• Display failures  
• Flight programming errors  
• Navigation failures  
Confusion/liaison errors between flight crew members (human factors)  
• Inter crew communication 
• Briefing  
• Competency oversights  
Interaction with other airspace users and the public  
• Conflict with another aircraft, such that a risk of collision may have existed 
• Infringement of airspace restrictions (Including Flight restriction zones (FRZs) around aerodromes and space sites ) 
• Inadvertent flight within close proximity of uninvolved persons (i.e. within the prescribed separation distances)  
Other emergencies  
• Any occurrence where the safety of the aircraft, operator, other airspace users or members of the public is compromised or reduced to a level whereby potential for harm or damage is likely to occur (or only prevented through luck ).
 
The purpose of the AAIB is to improve aviation safety by determining the circumstances 
and causes of air accidents and serious incidents and promoting action to prevent 
recurrence.  
2.7.8.1.  What UAS occurrences must be reported to the AAIB  
All UAS accidents  and serious incidents  are required to be reported to the AAIB, 
regardless of weight or whether they are being used for commercial purposes.  
2.7.8.2.  Who must report UAS occurrences to the AAIB? 
Any person involved who has knowledge of an aircraft accident or serious incident in the UK must report it to the AAIB. ‘Any person’ includes (but it not limited to) the owner, operator, and remote pilot of a UAS. A more detailed list can be found on the 
AAIB website . 
2.7.8.3.  How to report a UAS accident or serious incident to the AAIB  
Details  of how to report a UAS accident or serious incident can be found on the AAIB 
website . 
 When making a report, UAS operators should also include their ‘operator ID’ (registration) number, and state whether an operational authorisation is held.  
2.7.8.4.  The AAIB UAS investigation policy  
The AAIB  policy is to invest igate accidents and serious incidents to UA where they are:  
 
1. Operated under a CAA operational authorisation (i.e. in the specific category) or  
2. the UA is certified, or  
3. the UA has a take- off weight greater than 20 kg, or  
4. the UA has caused a serious injury or fatality.  
A non-fatal accident involving an uncertified UA without an operational authorisation may 
be investigated if there was a risk to life, potential for injury,  or there are expected to be 
lessons to be drawn for the improvement of aviation safety.    
Contact the AAIB if you have any questions about their investigation policy.  
2.7.8.5.  Preservation of evidence after an incident  
The law requires that  you preserve evidence following an accident.  
Regulation (EU) 996/2010 Article 13 Para 2 says:  
 
‘Pending the arrival of safety investigators, no person shall modify the state of the site of 
the aircraft, its contents or its wreckage, move or remove it, except where such action may 
be required for safety reasons or to bring assistance to injured persons, or under the 
express permission of the authorities in control of the site and, when possible, in 
consultation with the safety investigation authority .’ 
Contact the AAIB if you have any questions about this law.  
2.7.8.6.  If you have questions about reporting to the AAIB  
Contact  the AAIB if you have any questions about reporting occurrences to the AAIB or 
what to do after an accident.  
2.7.9.  Reporting UAS occurrences to the CAA  
2.7.9.1.  How to report a UAS occurrence to the CAA  
Reports are submitted to the CAA using the European Co- ordination Centre for Accident 
and Incident Reporting Systems (ECCAIRS 2) reporting portal.  
The reporting portal can be found here  . 
Guidance on how to use the portal can be found in CAP 1496 .  When making a report, UAS 
operators should also include their ‘operator ID’ (registration) number, and state whether 
an operational authorisation is held.  
It should be noted that when selecting the UK, within this system, it explains that the user 
is reporting as an ICAO state, and not under regulation EU 376/2014. This is because the 
UK has left the EU, and so reports are made under the UK version of that r egulation, 
rather than the EU version.  
2.7.9.2.  Specific Category operations  
The CAA will expect reporting in accordance with the specific category flowchart when an occurrence takes place at a time when the aircraft or its remote pilot is doing something that does require authorisation.  
The CAA will expect reporting in accordance with the open category flowchart when an 
occurrence takes place at a time when the aircraft or its remote pilot is doing something 
that does not require authorisation.  
Operators and remote pilots carrying out flights in the specific category must be fami liar 
with the guidance of this document and the reporting requirements in their authorisation.  
This approach is intended to minimise the mandatory reporting requirement on operators and remote pilots. It will also keep mandatory reporting requirements aligned and proportionate to the safety risk of the operation.  
Further information on mandatory and voluntary occurrence reporting 
Reporting analysis and software solutions for organisations  
Further guidance for organisations can be found in CAP 382 . 
 
2.7.9.3.  Voluntary occurrence reporting  
 
Confidential Human Factors Incident Reporting Programme “CHIRP”  
Although the CAA MOR process is the default method of reporting incidents, there are 
circumstances when a reporter may not wish to report through the normal process for 
personal reasons (for example if they fear that their identification will result in retribution) or if they have been unable to achieve a resolution through normal channels.  
The UK Confidential Human Factors Incident Reporting Programme (CHIRP) compliments 
the occurrence reporting system detailed in 2.9.10 above and any other formal reporting 
systems, by providing a means by which individuals are able to raise safety -related i ssues 
of concern without being identified to their peer group, management, or the CAA.   
CHIRP is a totally independent programme for the collection of confidential safety data, 
and when appropriate, acting or advising on information gained through confidential 
reports. Independent advice is provided on aeromedical and Human Factors aspects of 
reports, involving such topics as errors, fatigue, poor ergonomics, management pressures, 
deficiencies in communication or team performance.  Reports may include but are not confined to the design and use of aircraft and equipment, rules and procedures, 
regulations, workplaces, manpower, organisation, management, communication, human 
skills and training.  
A link to file a report with CHIRP can be found here.  
Further information is also available on the CAA website here  
The fundamental principle underpinning CHIRP is that all reports are treated in absolute confidence in order that reporters’ identities are protected. CHIRP offers a confidential 
alternative for those who wish their identities to be protected. CHIRP does not accept 
reports submitted anonymously.  
 
 
 
 
3.1. Categories  of UAS Operation  
3.1.1.  Open Category  
See section 2.2.1.3 for guidance on Open Category product standards.  
3.1.2.  Specific Category  
UAS operated in the Specific category are not necessarily subject to specific certification 
requirements .  Technical standards, (including UAS designed for use in the Open category 
as designated within  UK Regulation (EU) 2019/945)  are dependent on the proposed type 
of operation and its associated risk assessment.  
‘Certified’ equipment may be used within the ‘specific’ category as per UK Regulation (EU)  
2019/947, UAS.SPEC.100. A UAS subject  to certification shall comply with the applicable 
requirements set out in UK  Regulations (EU) 748/2012, 2015/640 and 1321/2014.  
3.1.3.  Certified Category  
The design, production and maintenance of a UAS must be certified if any of the following conditions as defined in UK Regulation (EU)  2019/947 Article 6 and UK Regulation (EU)  
2019/945 Article 40 are met:  
• it has a characteristic dimension of 3 m or more, and is designed to be 
operated over assemblies of people;  
• it is designed for transporting people;  
• it is designed for the purpose of transporting dangerous goods and requires a 
high level of robustness to mitigate the risks for third parties in case of an accident.  
In addition, a UAS may also need to be certified if the CAA determines that an application to operate in the specific category presents too high a safety risk and cannot be sufficiently 
mitigated. In these circumstances the operation must be carried out in the certified 
category to obtain the appropriate level of assurance that the operation is safe enough.  
UK Regulation (EU) 2019/947 Article 12 requires the CAA to evaluate the risk assessment 
and the robustness of the mitigating measures that the UAS operator proposes to keep the 
authorise the operation in the specific category and inform the applicant of the reason why. 
 
This chapter  offers basic high- level guidance on what aircraft certification is and what 
activities are associated with aircraft certification. These are more generally referred to as 
‘initial airworthiness’ and interrelate with the activities associated with ‘continuing’ and 
‘continued’ airworthiness.  The text provides an overview of the objectives of the 
airworthiness and the certification principles and processes . This  is intended to give a 
general understanding of the various aspects of civil aircraft certification and the related organisational oversight activities.  
This is a general outline only; reference should still be made to other airworthiness documentation, refer to the CAA website for further information.  The principles outlined in this section apply  only to certified UAS platforms in the context of this  document . 
Detailed principles for the certification of autonomous systems have not been developed 
yet. Once the regulatory framework has been published and adopted then this document  
will be updated.  
3.2.1.  What level of certification is required? 
This section offers guidance on the level of certification required for an aircraft or UAS and is based upon its intended use.  Where no formal airworthiness certification is required 
guidance is given on the approach to take.  
Some aircraft are not required to hold any airworthiness approvals. These can be operated 
under an operational authorisation or permit  to fly, provided they are suitably separated 
from third parties and property, as well as other airspace users. A lack of ‘demonstrable 
airworthiness’ can still be accommodated, albeit with limitations or restrictions placed on 
the operation, where appropriate. This approach is intended to provide a reasonable and proportionate level of regulation.  
At the highest level, aircraft have a Certificate of Airworthiness which is underpinned by Type Certification, continued airworthiness processes, and design and production 
organisation approvals. These aircraft are flown by licensed and rated pilots, as well as 
maintained by licenced engineers under the procedures  of an approved organisation, and 
thus are capable of international operations under the mutual recognition arrangements.  
3.2.1.1.  Aircraft classification  
The current certification framework established and used by the UK CAA, EASA and other NAAs, classifies aircraft based on the type (e.g., balloon, fixed or rotary wing) and mass. 
This reflects the historic developments in manned aviation but is not necessarily fully 
appropriate for the certification of UAS and may need to be adapted. However, until such 
Work is being developed at the UK national level and internationally to categorise new and 
innovative classes of aircraft such as Hybrid and e- VTOL aircraft.  
UAS fall within the remit of Annex IX of the Basic Regulation, unless they are State aircraft or fall within the exceptions defined in paragraph 2 of Annex I.  
Certificati on is the legal recognition by the certification authority that a product, service or 
organisation complies with the applicable requirements.  
Certification comprises the activity of technically checking the product, service, 
organisation or person, and the formal recognition of compliance with the applicable requirements by issue of a certificate, licence, approval, or other documents as required by applicable regulations.  
The rationale behind certification for UAS is that the same target levels of safety that apply to manned aircraft should also apply to UAS being used for higher risk operations. This 
should ensure the safety of third parties on the ground and in the air.  
Therefore, certification is the process to define and establish a set of operational and 
technical parameters that the aircraft must  be operated within.  This does not mean that 
because the product is certified that it may be suitable for all envisaged types of operations. Therefore, operational restrictions may also be applied in addition to the 
airworthiness requirements.  
Generally, it is the manufacturer (i.e., the organisation responsible for designing and 
constructing the aircraft) that will apply to its respective National Aviation Authority (NAA) 
for certification. NAAs do not generally certify platforms for individuals acting as operators, unless they are also the designer and manufacturer of the platform.  
3.2.2.  Certification objectives  
Annex 8 of the Chicago Convention contains the SARPS for Airworthiness. These are a system of internationally agreed standards and recommended practices by which each ICAO contracting State can establish a means to ensure that a minimum level of safety is 
established and achieved.  This process enables States to mutually recognise the 
airworthiness of individual aircraft operating within each other's airspace.  
As not all types of aviation require routine international operating capability, each State can define and establish its own standards and practices for these ‘national activities’.  
Therefore, it is important to recognise that the headline title of airworthiness/certification is 
a means by which the competent authority of a State can establish and attest to compliance with an agreed set of standards.  These standards cover the necessary range 
and usually are, different for varying classes of aircraft and their intended use.  
For example:  
To comply with the ICAO international requirements aircraft must be operated under 
cover of an Operational Approval; each aircraft must have a valid Certificate of 
Airworthiness (which is underpinned by an approved Type Design) and be flown by appropriately qualified and licensed flight crew.  
At the other end of manned aviation, light weight non- complex  personal use (recreational) 
aircraft may only need to have a Permit to Fly, which is a national approval , i.e., Non -ICAO 
compliant . This limits use to that country only and could include limitations and conditions 
on where and when it can be flown (e.g., class of airspace, weather conditions, etc). It must also be noted that a national approval precludes automatic rights of use/operation in 
another country. However,  this does not prevent use or operation in another country, but i t 
does mean each NAA will need to determine how and what it will allow by a separate 
process.  
3.2.2.1.  Initial, continuing and continued airworthiness  
Within the certification and airworthiness system there are three basic processes to set 
and maintain required standards. These processes determine and maintain the intended 
level of safety:  
 
• Initial airworthiness  
The initial airworthiness processes are those used to determine the applicable 
requirements and establish that an aircraft design is demonstrated to be able to 
meet these requirements. This includes the safety targets and the development of 
instructions for use and ongoing care/maintenance. I t would also cover the 
elements of production, i.e., those aspects of taking the approved design and 
manufacturing the end product to the point of a useable aircraft. This phase must 
be completed prior to an aircraft entering into service.  
• Continuing airworthiness  
The continuing airworthiness process refers to the system of management of the 
aircraft and the scheduling and actioning of ongoing preventative and corrective 
maintenance to confirm correct functioning and to achieve safe, reliable and cost -
effective operation.  
• Continued ai rworthiness  
Continued airworthiness refers to the monitoring, reporting and corrective action processes used for in- service aircraft to assure they maintain the appropriate 
safety standard defined during the initial airworthiness processes throughout their 
In parallel with each of these processes, there are schemes that require or provide for 
organisation approvals, e.g., design, production, maintenance. These approvals enable 
the NAAs to recognise capability within a company system; this limits the level of investigation and oversight that may be necessary to establish compliance against the regulatory standards applicable to individual products.  
3.2.2.2.  Initial airworthiness processes  
The initial airworthiness process establishes a required level of airworthiness integrity for 
an aircraft  and to demonstrate that this level of integrity can be achieved. Integrity must  be 
taken to include all aspects of the design (structurally and systemically) to cover safety, 
reliability, availability, capability, etc.  
When the required level of airworthiness integrity is met and consistently shown to be 
achieved, the aircraft can be considered to provide an acceptable level of safety; this covers both the vehicle (and any person(s) on board, if applicable) and, by inference from 
continued safe flight, to persons and property on the ground.  
The initial airworthiness processes have the following basic elements for design and production:  
• Establishment of the design/certification requirements (certification 
specifications) which  define the high- level design criteria and showing that 
these are met.  
• The design organisation aspects which cover the capability and competence of 
the company for the design of the complete aircraft, systems or individual parts.  
• The production organisation aspects which cover the capability and competence for the manufacture and assembly of the complete aircraft, systems or individual parts in accordance with the approved design and testing of the aircraft prior to delivery.  
The design organisation must de monstrate to the certification authority that the proposed 
design is compliant with the established and agreed certification specifications or other requirements. The production organisation is responsible for showing that the end product 
is in conformance to the design.  
For current categories of manned aircraft, there are already established design/certification requirements, such as the Certification Specifications (e.g., Large Aeroplanes (CS -25), 
Large Rotorcraft (CS -29), Very Light Aircraft (CS -VLA), an d Very Light Rotorcraft (CS -
VLR)  etc.). These provide acceptable means of compliance and guidance material on the 
intent of the requirement that are acceptable  to the competent authority . It is recognised 
that these may not fully address the range of aircraft potentially possible, nor how the 
technology elements relevant to UAS may cross the boundaries between the categories of the requirements.  
operational management, each class of aircraft will have some level of safety requirement.  
Where a formal certification approval is necessary, the safety assessment requirement for 
"Equipm ent, Systems and Installations" and the associated guidance material is already 
defined in the Certification Specifications under paragraph CSXX.1309 (in some more recent design requirement sets, the paragraph number is XX.2510). However, this may not be wholly appropriate for all categories of aircraft.  
3.2.2.3.  Continuing airworthiness processes  
The continuing airworthiness processes a ssure that in– service aircraft are managed and 
maintained correctly.  To be performed correctly, this must be done by appropriately  
competent and authorised persons, and in accordance with the instructions developed by the design organisation. This ensures that  assumptions and considerations made during 
the design, particularly in respect of safety, remain valid. As a result, these processes also need effective communication between the operator, maintenance organisations and the design organisations to ensure that necessary information is shared and if necessary , 
corrective actions are taken by the relevant parties . 
The continuing airworthiness process will support any modifications, repair or component 
replacement once an aircraft has entered service.  This is achieved by undertaking the 
incorporation of the changes, but also in the management of configuration records, updating of maintenance instructions, etc.  This process will last for the entire life span of 
the aircraft remaining in service.  
3.2.2.4.  Continued airworthiness processes  
The continued airworthiness processes are intended to provide a closed loop monitor and 
corrective action c ycle for in- service aircraft to assure that the intended level of safety is 
maintained. The process starts with activity within the certification work (for example the 
development of the maintenance schedules and instructions on how to perform this 
activit y). Thereafter, it includes the monitoring of in- service aircraft and the promulgation of 
corrective action instructions  where necessary . 
The development of maintenance schedules typically considers and uses information from the aircraft design and safety assessment processes to determine what maintenance 
activities are required, and how frequently they will be performed to maintain the 
appropriate level of aircraft integrity (for example replacing parts before they would 
typically wear out or fail will pre vent the consequence of this and hence aid both safety 
and commercial costs).  
The monitoring and reporting processes support the collection and analysis of in-service 
information and enable the design organisation to be satisfied that the overall level of safety is being maintained, or if necessary, to determine and promulgate corrective actions to address problem areas.  
If these programmes are run correctly, they have the potential to save organisations 
before it becomes a major  problem.  
3.2.3.  Stages of a irworthiness  
3.2.3.1.  Initial and c ontinued airworthiness  
This process consists of design and production activities. This is primarily covered under 
Part 21 - ‘’Certification of Aircraf t and Related Products, Parts and Appliances, and of 
Design and Production Organisation”.  
During the initial certification of an aircraft, the initial and continued airworthiness processes  may be considered to run concurrently because the information developed 
within the initial airworthiness processes feeds into the continued airworthiness processes 
to develop the “instructions for continued airworthiness”, i.e., the maintenance schedules 
and tasks which need to reflect the assumptions and considerations of use of the aircraft.  
In principle, once it has been demonstrated both the initial airworthiness and continued 
airworthiness requirements have been met, an aircraft type will be issued with a Type Certificate (TC). 
Type Certificates are currently only issued to the following products : 
• Aircraft  
• Engines  
• Auxiliary Power Unit (APU)  
• Propellers  
The development of all other types of aircraft system is required to be overseen by the 
Type Certificate applicant.  
Once an aircraft, engine, APU or propeller holds a Type Certificate any changes will fall into the following categories:  
• Major Change – This is a significant change to the design of an aircraft, engine, 
propeller or related system that is designed and implemented by the holder of the Type C ertificate. 
• Supplemental Type Certificate (STC) – This is a significant change to the design 
of an aircraft, engine or propeller that is not designed and implemented by the holder of the relevant Type Certificate.  
• Minor Change – This is a non- significant c hange to the design of an aircraft, 
engine, propeller or related system which is not permitted to affect the extant aircraft, engine or propeller level safety assumptions.  
aircraft, engine or propeller that falls outside the agreed scope of use defined 
during the initial and continued airworthiness processes. In principle this must be 
discussed and agreed with the relevant TC holder, but this is not actually 
mandated.  
Clearly any change to a certificated system that does not involve the TC holder has potential implications for aviation safety.  
Note 1 :  
In UAS the Command Unit is an integral component to the UAS. Therefore, it is envisaged 
that this may require its own TC or appropriate documentation that evidences that the 
equipment meets the minimum performance requirements.  
Note 2 :  
The DAA capability will not receive its own standalone TC. This will form part of the overall TC issued to the UAS by the Competent Authority.  
3.2.3.2.  Continuing airworthiness  
The continuing airworthiness process begins with an evaluation of an organisation to 
determine whether or not it meets the basic requirements to be allowed to perform initial 
and/or continued airworthiness functions.  
This process seeks to determine compliance against one or more of a number of 
organisational approval requirements documents:  
• Part 21 – “Certification of Aircraft and Related Products, Parts and Appliances, 
and of Design and Production Organisation”. In simple terms , this document 
applies to organisations involved in initial airworthiness.  
• Part M – “Continuing Airworthiness Requirements”. This relates to organisations 
that are responsible for managing and overseeing maintenance tasks and maintenance scheduling.  
• Part 145 – “Approved Maintenance Organisations”. This applies to organisations 
that perform continued airworthiness related tasks under the management of an organisation approved to Part M.  
• Part 147 – “Maintenance Training Organisational Approvals”. This applies t o 
organisations that are responsible for the provision of aviation maintenance related training and examinations . 
• Part 66 – “Certifying Staff”. This documents the competency requirements for 
maintenance personnel that are responsible for signing off aircraft or aircraft 
systems as serviceable.  This is commonly referred to a licenced engineer.  
website: UK CAA Airworthiness   
No organisation is permitted to work within the aviation industry unless they either have the relevant approvals, as dictated by the continuing airworthiness processes or they are overseen by an organisation that holds the relevant approval. This is intended to ensure 
that any aviation work is performed with a degree of integrity commensurate to the risk 
associated with that activity. Once an approval has been granted, the continuing airworthiness process runs concurrently with the initial and continued airworthiness 
processes to ensure that an appropriate level of organisational integrity is maintained to 
support the individual project/aircraft level tasks overseen by the initial and continued airworthiness processes.  
If the initial and/or continued airworthiness processes identify organisational risks, this information is passed back into the continuing airworthiness processes to ensure that these risks are managed appropriately.  
3.2.4.  General certification requirements  
The approach taken by the UK CAA for certification is, in principle, the same as that followed by EASA. Within this process, the actual requirements that make up the 
certification basis, must be shown to be met and complied with. These requirements may 
well be different for other  NAAs due to the views, experience and concerns of each 
country.  
3.2.4.1.  Basic principles  
The initial airworthiness or “Type Certification” process can be considered to follow a 
simple process, however there may be parallel paths in obtaining Design Organisation 
Approval (DOA) and Production Organisation Approval (POA), where these are necessary, 
which must come together at key cross -contact points.  
 All certification tasks, irrespective whether they are performed internally or allocated to an 
NAA shall be executed following the provisions of this procedure.  
The certification project process can generally be divided in the following phases:  
• Phase 0: Definition and agreement of the working methods with the applicant . 
The objective of this phase is to check applicant's eligibility and establish the Team of experts.  
• Phase I: Technical Familiarisation and establishment of the Initial Certification 
Basis .   
the Team of experts to enable the definition of an agreement on the initial Competent Authority Certification Basis.  
• Phase II: Agreement of the Certification Programme and Level of Involvement.  
The objective of this phase is the definition of, and the agreement on, the proposed means of compliance for each requirement of the Certification Basis and the identification of the Certification Team's Level of Involvement.  
• Phase III: Compliance determination. 
The objective of this phase is to demonstrate compliance with the applicable Certification Basis and environmental protection requirements and provide the Competent Authority with the means by which such compliance has been demonstrated and declare that compliance has  been demonstrated.  
• Phase IV: Technical closure and issue of the Approval . 
The objective of this phase is to technically close the investigation and issue the Certificate. 
Certification Review Items (CRI) and Certification Action Items (CAI) are raised 
whenever it is foreseen in the procedure. However, CRI and CAI may also be 
raised in the course of a certification project whenever it is deemed necessary.  
Procedure users are advised to consult the UG.CERT.00002 AW of Type Design
 for 
additional guidance where necessary.  
From the above processes the derivation of the applicable requirements is clearly a key 
aspect. However, the current manned requirements set does  not align with the 
types/size/mass of aircraft that are being developed as UAS.  
Unfortunately, the timeline for developing requirements is likely always to be behind the 
rate of technological advancement. The current approach is therefore to identify the category that fits as best as possible to the type/classification of the aircraft – and subtract 
what is not necessary and add to fill the gaps where required.  The gaps can be filled by 
parts of other requirement sets, where practicable, and/or by developing new material where necessary.  
• For example: a simple fixed wing aeroplane design may align well with the VLA (Very Light Aeroplanes) category with respect to structure and control surface 
actuation etc. However, because of the UAS aspects, the design may have a sophisticated command and flight control system, which is not addressed in CS -
VLA. Use of the relevant sections of CS -23 or even CS -25 may be applicable.   
The following list defines the different certification categori es for aircraft:  
CS – 23 Normal, Utility, Aerobatic and Commuter Aeroplanes.  cs-23
  
CS – 27 Small Rotorcraft.  cs-27  
CS – 29 Large Rotorcraf t. cs-29  
CS – VLA Very Light Aircraft.  cs-vla  
CS – VLR Very Light Rotorcraft. cs-vlr  
The main difficulty with this approach, apart from the commercial risk prior to agreement 
with the competent authority for design, is the potential lack of cohesion between the safety target levels  from the different standards.  
Work is being undertaken through various international bodies, such as JARUS, to 
establish Certification Specifications (CS) for Unmanned Aircraft Systems: 
JARUS_CS-
UAS and JARUS_CS- LURS and CS-LUAS .  
These certification specifications may be adopted by competent authorities to assist in the 
certification process. These need to be agreed between the applicant and the competent authority beforehand.  
At present, the UK has not formally adopted any CS publications for UAS.  When any 
certification specification is adopted this will be communicated.  
3.2.4.2.  Additional certification specifications  
There are additional CS used in aviation for engines, propellers, airborne CNS and aircraft 
noise. These need to be considered by the equipment designer when designing equipment seeking approval from the relevant competent authority.  
Examples of this include:  
AMC 20 General Acceptable Means of Compliance for Airworthiness of Products, Parts and Appliances.  
CS – APU Auxiliary Power Units.  
CS – E Engines.  
CS – ETSO European Technical Standard Orders.  
CS – P Propellers.  
CS – 36 Aircraft Noise.  
This list is not exhaustive; readers should refer to the UK CAA website for further 
guidance.  
3.2.4.3.  Special conditions  
Special detailed technical specifications, named special conditions (SC), may be 
adequate or appropriate safety standards.  These are usually required because:  
• The product has novel or unusual design features relative to the design practices 
on which the applicable airworthiness code is based; or  
• The intended use of the product is unconventional; or  
• Experience from other similar products in service or products having similar design features has shown that unsafe conditions may develop.  
Some of the existing SC that have been issued have a “generic” characteristic, i.e., they are applicable to all products, or all products incorporating a certain technology, or all 
aircraft performing certain specific operations. Some of these SC have been used for 
many years on several certification projects.  
One recent example, published by EASA, is SC – VTOL EASA_SC -VTOL
  
3.2.4.4.  Restricted Type Certificate (RTC)  
A restricted type certificate may be applied for when a type certificate is inappropriate, and the aircraft is designed for a special  purpose for which the Competent Authority agrees 
deviations from the full requirements that provide a sufficient level of safety for the 
intended use.  
3.2.4.5.  Supplemental Type Certificate (STC)  
A supplemental type certificate (STC) is a type certificate (TC) issued when an applicant has received Competent Authority  approval  to modify an aeronautical product from its 
original design.  The STC, which incorporates by reference the related TC, approves not only the modification but also how that modification affects the original design.  
3.2.4.6.  Permit to Fly  
An aircraft that does not meet the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) certification standards required for the issue of a Certificate of Airworthiness (C of A) may be issued a permit to fly, subject to satisfying certain requirements and only operated 
within certain limitations.  
 
A permit to fly will not be issued to an aircraft that is eligible for the issue of a C of A but 
may be issued in the event of a C of A becoming temporarily invalid.  
3.2.5.  General Safety a ssessment points 
This section offers guidance on some general safety assessment points  for UAS 
Certification and Safety Assessment of aircraft systems.  
manner and type of operation it is intended to perform. It is not intended here to describe any of the many different types of assessment or analyses that can be undertaken, but to outline the general system safety assessment points  to be considered.  
It is important to recognise that Safety Assessments, if conducted as a fundamental and 
iterative design process, can provide benefits in terms of the level of safety achievable. 
This may  also achieve a degree of reliability and potentially  minimise the cost of ownership 
through effective maintenance schedules.  
If the Safety Assessment is considered retrospectively, the potential findings of an assessment may prove difficult and costly to rectify. Issues identified in the Safety 
Assessment may require redesign or the implementation of limitations and restrictions. 
The earlier in the design process these issues are identified, the less impact they are likely to have on the development schedule and budget.  
3.2.5.1.  Assessment steps  
A Safety Assessment may be considered in the following steps:  
• Determination of the set of aircraft level threats/hazards related to functional failures are identified;  
• The severity of the consequence for each of these failure conditions is determined/classified;  
• This classification could be different for differing scenarios, e.g., during different phases of flight;  
• The target level of safety (TLOS) is assigned for each failure condition;  
• The systems and component failures that could contribute to each of these 
failure conditions is assessed or analysed to establish if the individual TLOS is 
met; 
• Compliance with each individual failure condition and the overall aircraft level target is shown.  
Within the airworthiness requirements set, the aircraft certification specifications contain specific requirements and levels of safety defined in terms of probability. For smaller/ specific classes of aircraft, the airworthiness requirements may not define levels of safety 
in terms of probability – hence the method of demonstrating compliance is open for 
discussion. Potential options for demonstrating compliance include the use of sound 
engineering judgement, justification through assessment and evidence rather than 
probabilistic analysis.  This is important as probability analysis rely on robust component 
reliability data  which may not be possible with new or developing technologies and 
components.  
Each of the UAS design requirement sets will include system safety requirements. These 
are often referred to as paragraph number 1309 of the applicable CS (e.g. CS -XX.1309). 
In some more recent design requirement sets, the paragraph number is XX.2510. This 
requires that the probability of a failure is inversely proportional to the severity of its effect 
at aircraft level.  Therefore, high criticality systems are required to have an extremely low probability of failure.  
These certification requirements were established many years ago based on in-service experience (accident data etc) and a desire to set a standard that would drive 
improvements in what was then being achieved. For each class of passenger transport 
aircraft (large and small fixed wing aircraft, rotorcraft, etc.), an acceptable fatal accident rate was defined, e.g., 1 accident in 10 million flight hours (10- 7 per flight hour), for a large, 
fixed wing aircraft.  Then based on simple assumptions regarding the number of aircraft 
systems and potentially critical failures in each of these, a target level of safety was defined for each critical failure. This is described in detail within the advisory material that 
goes with the requirement. The tables below detail the hazard classification and likelihood 
of occurrence.  
Hazard Classification  
Definition  Meaning 
Catastrophic  Results in accident, death or equipment destroyed  
Hazardous  Serious injury or major equipment damage 
Major  Serious incident or injury  
Minor  Results in minor incident  
No Safety Effect  Nuisance of little consequence  
Table 3- Summary of Hazard Classification  
 
Likelihood of Occurrence 
Definition  Meaning Quantitative Numerical Definition  of 
likelihood per hour  
Frequent  Likely to occur many times  1 to 10-3 per hour  
Occasional  Likely to occur sometimes  10-3 to 10-5 per hour  
Remote  Unlikely to occur but possible  10-5 to 10-7 per hour  
Improbable  Very unlikely to occur  10-7 to 10-9 per hour  
Improbable  Almost inconceivable that the 
event will occur  < 10-9 per hour  
Table 4- Summary of Likelihood Classification  
 
The validity of using these probability targets for UAS is currently a debated subject. 
Clearly, they relate to passenger transport aircraft and the safety of passengers carried. 
However, it must be noted that by protecting persons on board an aircraft, it is implied that  
third parties on the ground will also be protected.  
There is also some discussion that the types of operation undertaken by passenger aircraft 
are quite different to the range of operations undertaken by UAS and so once again, the probability targets may not be appropriate. However, the safety assessment process 
already accounts for this to some extent because, due to these differences, the 
consequence or severity of effect could be quite different, and so result in a different target level of safety.  
For UAS, the safety assessment and any analysis or justification to demonstrate 
compliance with the level of safety target is primarily based on the aircraft system and its 
associated failure mechanisms. The aircraft system is the total system required for saf e 
flight and landing, e.g., the aircraft, command unit, command and control datalinks and any 
launch or landing/recovery systems.  
In principle, it does not place any reliance on external factors that may mitigate the failure; these are the safety nets that  could prevent the worst -case scenario.  
It must also be noted that where the simple assumptions made in the certification safety assessment requirements are not valid (e.g., ‘independent’ vs ‘integrated’ systems, 
‘simple’ vs ‘complex’ systems, and the number of critical failure conditions), it may be 
necessary to impose more stringent targets to individual failure conditions in order to meet the aircraft target level of safety.  
For UAS operating in the Specific category, the proportionate approach that is taken does not necessarily require a safety assessment to  the level described above. However, the 
safety case and risk assessment approach does still require consideration of the hazards (including those that could be due to aircraft system failures), their severity, and justification of how these will be mitigated and managed. It is therefore required that some 
level of assessment and justification of how and why hazards are suitably managed will be 
necessary, albeit not necessarily to the level that uses detail probability -based analyses. 
This will be assessed by the CAA prior to any operational  authorisation being issued to the 
applicant.  
Risk a ssessment  methodology and guidance material for applicants is contained in CAP 
722A for operations within the S pecific category.   
CHAPTE R 3 | Airworthiness and Certification  
The text below describes other airworthiness  related terms  that relate to product 
certification and continuing airworthiness. These are high level descriptions. Further 
information can be found on the related websites and other published docum ents.  
• Certificate of Conformance:  This is a certificate issued to a product which 
declares that the product meets the required standard for use on an aircraft. It is 
generally issued against a very generic standard and is mainly used for 
consumable type products in aviation, e.g., fasteners and other miscellaneous type items.  
• ET
 SO – European Technical Standard Order :  This is a detailed airworthiness 
specification issued by the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA). An ETSO 
ensures that a part or appliance complies with a minimum performance standard. 
In all cases, the installer must apply for an installation approval on- board the 
aircraft; EASA_ETSO    
• TSO – Technical Standard Order:  This is issued by the Federal Aviation 
Administration (FAA). A TSO is a minimum performance standard for specified 
materials, parts, and appliances used on civil aircraft. When authorised to 
manufacture a material, part, or appliances to a TSO standard, this is referred to as ‘TSO authorization’. Receiving a TSO authorization is both design and 
production approval. Receiving a TSO authorization is not an approval to ins tall 
and use the article in the aircraft. It means that the article meets the specific TSO 
and the applicant is authorised to manufacture it ; 
FAA_TSO    
• SB – Service Bulletin :  A Service Bulletin is the document used by manufacturers 
of aircraft, engines or components to communicate details of modifications which 
can be embodied in aircraft. If an available modification is judged by the 
manufacturer to be a matter of safety rather than simply product improvement, 
then these would be issued as an Alert SB in which case a corresponding Airworthiness Directive (AD) would usually then be issued by the appropriate NAA.  
• SI
 L – Service Information Letter :  This is a document is used by manufacturers of 
aircraft, engines or components to communicate details of advisory action or other ‘useful information’ about their products which may enhance safety, reliability or reduce repetitive costs.  
• AD – Air
 worthiness Directive :  An Airworthiness Directive is a notification to 
owners and operators of certified aircraft that a known safety issue with a 
particular model of aircraft, engine, avionics or system exists and must be corrected. Therefore, it is ma ndatory for an aircraft operator to comply with the 
instructions within an AD.  AD’s are only published by competent authorities.  
The value of the safety assessment process in the development of maintenance 
programmes (e.g., the t ype and frequency of maintenance actions), must also be 
recognised. The outputs of this  process provide useful data to determine what 
maintenance scheduling is required. These maintenance actions can prevent critical 
failures (e.g., by replacing items before they are likely to fail, or by detecting problems before operation of the aircraft). Not only does this support safety but it has the potential to 
save money – it is usually cheaper in terms of both money and time to fix a minor problem 
before it becomes a serious problem . 
3.2.5.5.  Standards bodies  
There are multiple standards bodies that are engaged with the development of standards 
for aeronautical  products such as UAS. Such bodies include E UROCAE, ASTM, RTCA 
etc. Readers should refer to the respective bodies’ websites for further information.  
The C AA may choose to accept suitable standards from these bodies as deemed 
appropriate for application in the certification of UAS. These may be published by the CAA 
when adopted.  

4.1. Communications, Navigation and Surveillance  
It is the responsibility of the UAS operator to ensure that the radio spectrum used for the 
C2 Link and for any payload communications complies with the relevant Ofcom requirements and that any licenses required for its operation have been obtained.  
It is also the responsibility of the operator to ensure that the appropriate aircraft radio 
licence has been obtained for any transmitting radio equipment that is installed or carried 
on the aircraft, or that is used in connection with the conduct of the flight  and that operates 
in an aeronautical band. 
4.1.1.  C2 Link Communications 
This section provides:  
• Information regarding the use of frequencies to support UAS operations . 
• Frequency bands that are potentially available to support UAS C2 and DAA 
systems, their limitations and the required authorisation of their use.  
It also sets out the CAA’s position in respect to:  
• the spectrum currently available and its limitations.  
• the application process for the use of spectrum  by the UAS industry .  
• the process for seeking access to alternative spectrum . 
4.1.1.1.  Introduction 
The provision of a reliable C2 Link is essential to the safe and expeditious operation of 
UAS. Although many existing aeronautical systems that support safety critical applications 
operate in suitably allocated and protected spectrum, these are often not suitable for UAS operations.  
The CAA’s overall aims are:  
• to ensure that frequencies used to support safety critical UAS functionality meet both international and national regulations/legislation. 
• to ensure that all frequencies used to support safety critical UAS functionality have been co- ordinated and licensed in accordance with the appropriate 
• to ensure that any such licence obtained provides suitable protection to the use 
of that frequency appropriate to the functionality and safety criticality of the 
systems being supported and the area of operation. 
• to assist in the identification of suitable dedicated spectrum to support UAS safety -critical functionality.  
4.1.1.2.  UK Radio Regulatory Framework  
Within the UK, management of spectrum is the responsibility of Ofcom.  The availability of 
spectrum and the licencing regime under which it operates will vary dependant on the operational requirement (e.g., within or beyond visual line of sight etc), environment (e.g., 
urban/rural etc,) and the safety criticality (e.g., separation, kinetic energy etc) of the 
function being supported.  
4.1.1.3.  Spectrum Availability  
Frequency bands are allocated by Ofcom, details can be found on the Ofcom website and include IR 2030 – UK Interface Requirements 2030 which covers licence exempt short 
range devices.  Applications for the assignment of frequencies within the bands must be 
addressed to Ofcom.  
Note : 
Any proposed use that does not conform to the regulatory limits applicable within a 
frequency band will need to be shown to be compatible with incumbent systems and approved/ licenced by Ofcom.  
4.1.1.4.  Allocation of Spec trum 
The CAA supports  Ofcom by providing the UK lead on issues related to aeronautical 
spectrum, including UAS. For information on how to participate in the process for the 
identification and allocation of spectrum that can be used to support UAS operations 
contact the CAA.  
Licencing of frequency allocations is the responsibility of Ofcom and hence, where 
required, all applications for a frequency assignment should be directed in the first instance to Ofcom.  In frequency bands where the CAA is the assigning authority, then the 
application will be passed to the CAA by Ofcom so that the CAA can conduct the technical 
work, but Ofcom still remains the licencing authority.  
Where a frequency licence is required (e.g., in protected frequency bands or where powers  exceed the current regulatory limits) the CAA will not be able to issue a permission 
or exemption.  
4.1.1.5.  Common Frequencies  
There are no specific frequencies allocated for use by UAS in the UK. However, the most used frequencies  are 35 MHz, 2.4 GHz and 5.8 GHz.  
clubs and individuals will be operating in a known environment to strict channel allocation 
rules. It is therefore not considered to be a suitable frequency for more general UAS 
operations (i.e., not in a club environment) where the whereabouts of other users is usually 
difficult to assess.  
2.4 GHz is a licence free band used for car wireless keys, household internet and a wide 
range of  other applications. Although this is considered to be far more robust to 
interference than 35 MHz, operators must act with appropriate caution in areas where it is expected that there will be a high degree of 2.4 GHz activity.  
5.8 GHz is a licenced band which requires a minimum payment and registration with 
Ofcom. This band is in use with other services including amateur -satellite, weather and 
military radars. Details can be found on the Ofcom website .  
For further guidance on whether a licence is required for your UAS, more information can be found on the Ofcom website.  
 
4.1.1.6.  Frequency Interference 
Operations close to any facility that could cause interference (such as a radar station) 
could potentially disrupt communications with the UAS, whatever the frequency in use. 
GNSS jamming activities may also disrupt communications as well as command and control signals. Information on scheduled GNSS jamming exercises can be found on the Ofcom website . 
This document does not include information on the UK Counter -Unmanned Aircraft 
Strategy. Details on this strategy can be found on the gov.uk website
. 
4.1.2.  Electronic Conspicuity  
The UK’s airspace is a finite resource. The rapid growth in UAS operations is driving changes to the way air traffic is managed and aircraft are segregated. UAS  are expected 
to co-e xist with manned aircraft and there must be means for each aircraft to be able to 
identify and respond to the other aircraft. While m ost UAS operations are expected to 
operate at lower altitudes, some UAS are also expected to operate at higher altitudes. To 
integrate new and existing airspace users into the finite volume of airspace safely and 
efficiently, all conventional aircraft must be able to ‘see, be seen and avoid’, and UAS must be able to ‘detect and be detected’ by means of available and recognised Electronic 
Conspicuity (EC) technology if operating BVLOS in non -segregated airspace. This section 
offers guidance to industry on the use of available and recommended EC solutions.  The 
UK is considering a number of options including a mandate on the use of EC in the UK 
airspace.
Conspicuity -devices   
4.1.2.1.  EC Terminology  
EC is an umbrella term for technologies that can help airspace users and ATS to be more 
aware of aircraft operating in the same airspace with the ability to ‘see and be seen’, or ‘detect and be detected’.  
The term ‘EC solutions’ refers to the devices, systems, and infrastructure that bring these 
technologies to market and ensure that they are interoperable.  
‘Full adoption’ of EC solutions means that all users operating in a designated block of 
airspace can be detected electronically.  
4.1.2.2.  EC as a Concept  
EC could help to reduce the risk of mid-air collisions through increasing both the quantity 
and quality of information for remote pilots, increasing their situational awareness. The 
CAA recognises that the development of EC solutions for UAS will be an evolutionary 
process and may take number of years for individual EC technologies to reach maturity.  
Although a range of technologies, devices, services and infrastructure could achieve a degree of EC, this does not mean that any technology, infrastructure, service or device which involves a form of conspicuity will automatically be classified as EC compatible or 
authorised.  In order to be authorised as ‘EC compatible’ a piece of equipment, device or 
service will first have to satisfy certain minimum performance, reliability, safety, interoperability and efficiency standards.  
UAS operators should be aware of the certain obligations before buying and using an EC device. Full details on these aspects can be found in CAP 1391 Electronic C onspicuity 
Devices  .  
Note 1:   
A Mode S transponder does not fall under the scope of CAP1391 and the requirement for light weight low power Mode S does not meet the performance requirements for gener al 
transponder certification. However, there is scope for the use of some transponders if they meet ETSO or FAA TSO certification standard. For more information on certification standards, please refer to 3.2.  
Note 2 :  
Any aircraft system transmitting on 1030 MHz, as may typically be used in collision warning or Detect and Avoid systems, must not be operated without an approval from the National IFF and SSR Committee (NISC) (see CAP 761).
The following requirements are applicable to all civil UAS operating BVLOS within non-
segregated UK airspace. 
4.2.1.  Introduction  
UAS must be able to interact with all other airspace users, regardless of the airspace or aircraft’s flight profile, in a manner that is transparent to all other airspace users and 
ANSPs, when compared to manned aircraft. Unmanned Aircraft , which are integrated with 
the wider aviation system,  must be interoperable with all surveillance systems, without any 
disproportionate additional workload for ATCOs, manned aircraft pilots or other remote 
pilots. UAS must include suitable equipment to satisfy any applicable equipage 
requirements of the airspace in which they are operating, such as Transponder Mandatory Zones (TMZs) or Radio Mandatory Zones (RMZs) to be interoperable with other airspace 
users and ATC. Where a UAS employs a collision avoidance system with reactive logic, 
any manoeuvre resulting from a perceived threat from another aircraft must not reduce the effectiveness of a traffic collision avoidance system resolution advisory manoeuvre from that aircraft.    
4.2.2.  Surveillance Technologies  
This section is complementary to the Detect and Avoid (DAA) guidance in this document . 
There are various ways in which aircraft communicate and broadcast information about their position and can otherwise be made conspicuous. Air traffic management is achieved through a combination of surveillance technologies such as ground- based radar, 
Automatic Dependent Surveillance- Broadcast ( ADS-B) and Wide Area Multilateration 
(WAM). All these technologies offer some degree of EC. This section sets out the most prominent surveillance technologies, their basic characteristics and functionally.  
The primary means of cooperative surveillance within the UK  is SSR Mode Select 
Elementary Surveillance (Mode S ELS). However, within certain areas of UK airspace, the 
carriage of an SSR transponder is not mandatory (see UK AIP Gen 1.5). In such airspace, 
where an Air Traffic Radar service is not mandatory, 'see and avoid' is often the primary means of separation of aircraft. Until it is possible to equip UAS with DAA capabilities that 
comply with appropriate future requirements and the SSR carriage policy, any UA intended 
to be operated in an area where it requires  surveillance services must be equipped with a 
functioning SSR Mode S transponder, unless operating within the terms of an exemption from this requirement. 
can effectively signal an aircraft’s presence to other similarly equipped airspace users, 
thereby enhancing situational awareness for those users. EC may assist remote pilots in remaining clear of other aircraft when operating beyond visual line of sight.  
4.2.3.  ADS-B  
ADS-B based EC is the modern version of surveillance via which the aircraft determines its 
own position using GNSS and periodically broadcasts its four -dimensional position 
(latitude, longitude, altitude, and time), velocity, airspeed, identity, and other additional relevant data as appropriate to the potential ground systems or to nearby aircraft. ADS -B 
data can be used to facilitate airborne traffic situational awareness, spacing and 
separation. A major difference between ADS -B and ground- based radar surveillance 
syste m is that there is no interrogation or two- way contract.  
ADS- B OUT refers to the transmission of data from one UAS to another UAS or UAS to 
manned aircraft or UAS to the remote pilot or system on the ground.  
ADS- B IN refers to the on- board receipt of ADS -B OUT data by another UAS or manned 
aircraft and allows for the display of nearby aircraft to the remote pilot.   
4.2.3.1.  ADS- B Frequencies  
Under existing arrangements, ADS -B devices exchange information at 1090 MHz.  ICAO 
is looking into the challenges of accommodating UAS within the existing aeronautical 
surveillance and collision avoidance systems. UAS operating in controlled airspace may 
be able to use current surveillance facilities. However, given the sizeable, forecasted 
increase of the UAS sector, the use of 1090 MHz by UAS in the lower airspace could lead to spectrum congestion. ICAO has issued a letter to States to ensure proper utilisation of 
1090 MHz below 500 feet.  The UK is currently exploring alternative surveillance 
technology such as 978 MHz for UAS to mitigate the risk of spectrum overloading at 1090 MHz.  
4.2.4.  Radar Surveillance  
There are two types of ground- based radar systems that can be used for surveillance and 
aircraft traffic management:  
• Primary Surveillance Radar (PSR) is a conventional radar that illuminates a large portion of space with an electromagnetic wave that is reflected by the target aircraft. A PSR system is used to detect the position and movement of a 
non-cooperative target (with no equipment such as transponder or EC device 
on board). However, the Radar Cross Section (RCS) and size of certain 
especially at low -level.  
• Secondary Surveillance Radar (SSR) is a Cooperative surveillance system 
which requires aircraft to be suitably equipped to be able to interact with surveillance sensors.  Aircraft respond to ground interrogations via their on-
board transponder.  The global  standard frequency for SSR to interrogate 
aircraft is 1030 MHz and aircraft replies on 1090 MHz via on- board 
transponder.   
4.2.4.1.  ICAO 24 -bit Aircraft Address  
The provision of Air Traffic Services (ATS) in a Mode S environment relies on a unique 
ICAO 24 -bit Air craft Address (AA) for selective interrogation of individual aircraft. In the 
SSR environment, the 24- bit AA is used as technical means of identification for use by the 
surveillance system, for example a Mode S SSR. ADS -B based EC devices also use 24 -
Bit AA as a means of system identification.  
4.2.4.2.  24-bit AA for EC Devices  
EC devices including light weight low power Mode- S transponders are designed to be 
portable, and potentially  move from one UA to another . Different rules will need to apply to 
them. This secti on explains the licensing obligation and responsibilities of both 
manufacturers and UAS operators.  
 
• The EC device should not be pre- loaded with an ICAO 24- bit address.  
• The device should allow for the ICAO 24- bit address to be programmable or 
reprogrammable by the user. Manufacturers should put in place a means of 
mitigating incorrect 24 -bit entry, such as a requirement to enter the 24- bit 
address twice. A function should also exist to clear the programmed 24- bit 
ICAO address, and to alert the user should no ICAO 24 -bit address be entered. 
Full instructions on how to complete these tasks should be contained within the device operating manual.  
• Attention of manufactures is also drawn to more detailed instructions and guidance contained in CAP1391.  
• If an EC device is bought to use on an UAS, the owner is required to contact the CAA Infrastructure Section (email: NISC@caa.co.uk
 ) shortly after buying 
the device. The operator must confirm their  contact details and the make, 
model and serial number of the EC device. The CAA will then allocate the EC device a unique ICAO 24- bit address. The address can then be used on 
multiple Unmanned aircraft without re- programming.  
• If the EC device is re- sold, the vendor should clear any registered aircraft 24- bit 
code from the device before sale. The new purchaser should contact the CAA 
allocated if necessary.  
4.2.4.3.  Special Purpose Transponder Codes  
If a UAS is equipped with a transponder and operating in an area where use of the transponder is necessary, the capability to change SSR code whilst in flight must be included. SSR code 7400 is used in order to notify ATC of a lost C2 Link. The UAS must 
be able to select this in such circumstances.
4.3.1.  Introduction  
Detect and Avoid is a generic expression which is used to describe a technical capability 
that is at least equivalent to the ‘see and avoid’ principle used in manned aviation to avoid collision with other aircraft and obstacles . When operating VLOS, the rules apply to UAS in 
the same way that VFR apply to manned aircraft. However, BVLOS UAS operations in a non-segregated airspace will not normally be permitted without an acceptable DAA 
capability . To maintain the appropriate levels of safety, a suitable method of aerial collision 
avoidance is required for all UAS operations.   
Note:   
The use of 'First Person View' equipment is not considered to be acceptable for use as a DAA solution.  
To be able to gain access to all classes of airspace without segregation, UAS will have to be able to display a capability that is equivalent to the existing safety standards applicable 
to manned aircraft types.  These capabilities will need to be appropriate to the class (or 
classes) of airspace within which they are intended to be operated.  
This section outlines the position of the CAA in respect of its role in assisting the UAS industry to find solutions to achieving a capability and level of safety which is equivalent to the existing 'see and avoid' concept. A Detect and Avoid (DAA) capability is only one of a 
number of requirements that will need to be addressed for safe operation of UAS, particul arly for operati ons in non- segregated airspace.  
4.3.2.  General  
The overriding principle when assessing if proposed UAS DAA functions are acceptable is 
that they must not introduce a greater hazard than currently exists for manned aviation.   
The UAS must be operated in a way that enables it to comply with the rules and 
obligations that apply to manned aircraft within the same class of airspace, particularly those applicable to separation and collision avoidance.   
An EC based solution could, if the airspace within which it is used was suitably mandated 
to be fully ‘cooperative’, enable DAA capabilities to be achieved by UAS in a shorter 
timeframe.  
Separation and collision avoidance are two distinct and potentially independent elements 
to a DAA capability, as described below. DAA replaces the capability that is provided in a manned aircraft by the pilot looking out of window which should include minimum of following functions:  
• Detect and avoid traffic (aircraft in the air and on the ground) in accordance 
with the Rules of the Air. 
• Detect and avoid all airborne objects, including gliders, hang- gliders, 
paragliders, microlights, balloons, parachutists etc . 
• Enable the remote pilot  to determine the in- flight meteorological conditions . 
• Avoid hazardous weather . 
• Detect and avoid terrain and other obstacles . 
4.3.3.1.  Detect Function 
The detect function is intended to identify potential hazards (other aircraft, terrain, weather etc.) and notify the appropriate mission management and navigation systems.  
4.3.3.2.  Avoid Function 
The avoid function may be split down into two parts:  
 
Separation Assurance & Traffic Avoidance  
This term is used to describe the routine procedures and actions that are applied to 
prevent aircraft getting into close proximity with each other. Any resolution manoeuvring 
conducted at  this stage must be conducted in accordance with the Rules of the Air. When 
flying in airspace where the provision of separation is the responsibility of ATC, however, the remote pilot must manoeuvre the aircraft in accordance with ATC instructions, in the same fashion as is done for a manned aircraft  
Collision Avoidance 
This is the final layer of conflict management and is the term used to describe any 
emergency manoeuvre considered necessary to avoid a collision. While the remote pilot 
would normally  be responsible for initiating a collision avoidance manoeuvre, an automatic 
function may be required in order to cater for collision avoidance scenarios where t he 
remote pilot  is unable to initiate the manoeuvre in sufficient time ( e.g. due to C2 Link 
latency issues or lost  C2 L ink scenarios.  
For routine BVLOS operations in non- segregated airspace a DAA capability w ill always be 
required unless the UAS operator is able to provide the CAA with clear evidence that the 
operation that is being proposed will pose no hazard to other aviation users.  
The minimum level of DAA capability that is required may be adjusted in accordance with the flight rules under which the UA flight is being conducted and class of airspace that the UA is being flown in as follows  
4.3.5.  IFR Flights within Controlled Airspace (Classes A to E)  
A Collision Avoidance capability will be required where the following conditions occur:  
• ATC separates from other traffic (although in Class D and E, the pilot of a conflicting VFR flight holds the separation responsibility) . 
• As for manned aviation, a collision avoidance capability is required in case the ‘normal’ sep aration provision fails . 
• If the flight is conducted wholly within controlled airspace where the operation of a transponder is mandatory, then a collision avoidance capability that is cooperative (e.g., ACAS) would be acceptable. 
If there is any possibility that the UAS may  leave controlled airspace and enter non-
segregated Class G airspace during the flight (including in an emergency), then the 
collision avoidance capability must be ‘ non-cooperative’ , unless there are other airspace 
measures in place that would still allow a cooperative system to be used; this includes 
airspace such as a Transponder Mandatory Zone, airspace above FL100 (where the operation of a transponder is required) etc . 
4.3.6.  VFR Flights within Controlled Airspace, or any Flight within Class G Airspace  
A Separation Assurance/Traffic Avoidance capability and a Collision Avoidance capability 
will be required. The remote pilot is the separator for all conflicts, with the same 
responsibilities as the pilot of a manned aircraft . 
4.3.7.  Factors for Consideration when Developing a DAA Capability  
To ensure that a DAA capability can provide the required level of safety, it must address a number of component functions including:  
• Decide – assessment of the collision threat  
• Command – selection of an appropriate avoidance manoeuvre 
• Execute – perform a manoeuvre that is compatible with the aircraft’s performance 
capabilities and airspace environment  
• Feedback loop – communication back to remote pilot  
Guidance for those engaged in the development of DAA systems should consider the 
factors that are listed below:  
• Ability to comply with the Rules of the Air;  
• Airworthiness,  i.e., system reliability and integrity;  
• Control method, controllability and manoeuvrabi lity; 
• Flight performance;  
• Communications procedures and associated links ; 
• Security (physical and cyber);  
• Emergency actions, reversionary or failure modes in the event of degradation of 
any part of the UAS and its associated Command Unit  and/or Relay Stations;  
• Actions in the event of lost communications and/or failure of on- board DAA 
equipment;  
• Ability to determine real -time meteorological conditions and type of terrain being 
overflown;  
• Nature of task and/or payload;  
• System authority of operation and control ; 
• Method of sensing other airborne objects;  
• Remote pilot  level of competence;  
• Communications with ATS providers, procedures and links with control station;  
• Means of launch/take- off and recovery/landing;  
• Reaction logic to other airspace objects;  
• Flight termination;  
• Description of the operation and classification of the airspace in which it is planned to be flown;  
• Transaction times (e.g. including delays introduced by satellite links);  
4.4. Remote Identification (Remote ID) 
Remote ID is the ability of a UAS to provide identification information that can be received 
by other parties. The purpose of Remote ID is to assist CAA, Law enforcement and 
Security agencies to identify a rogue UA or remote pilot or operator who appears to be 
operating in an unsafe manner or in an area where the UA is not permitted  to fly. Remote 
ID builds on the CAA Drone and model aircraft registration and education service (DMARES) framework.  
‘Direct remote identification’ refers to a system that ensures the local broadcast of 
information about a UA in operation, including the marking of the UA, so that this 
information can be obtained without physical access to the UA itself.  
‘Network remote identification’ is a system that transmits information through a connection with a network. In this case, the receiver does not receive the information directly, but through the network.  
4.4.1.  Remote ID Requirements  
4.4.1.1.  Open Category  
See section 2.2.1.3 for guidance on Open Category product standards.  
 
4.4.1.2.  Specific Category  
At present, there is no regulatory requirement for the activation of remote ID within the Specific category  in the UK.  
 
Note:  
Point (1)(l)ii of UAS.SPEC.050 (which refers to remote ID installation and activation) was 
not applicable when the EU exit transition period ended on 31 December 2020 and so does not form part of UK law.  Although paragraph 2 of Article 23 of UK Regulation (EUO 
2019/947 still refers to an applicability date of 2 December 2021), this will not apply in the 
UK without further legislative change. This decision will be made by the UK government.  
4.4.1.3.  Transmission Options  
If equipped with a Direct R emote Identification  System it shall allow, in real time during 
the whole duration of the flight the periodic transmission of selected data as determined by the applicable product  standard in a way that it can be received by existing mobile devices.  
If equipped with a Network Remote Identification  System it shall allow, in real time 
during the whole duration of the flight, the transmission from the UA using an open and 
documented transmission protocol, in a way that it can be received through a network,  of 
selected data as determined by the applicable product standard.  
The minimum mandatory data transmitted on either Remote Identification System is listed 
in UK Regulation (EU) 2019/945. The future standard for Remote Identification shall state 
any additional mandatory or optional data as required.
4.5.1.  Introduction  
This guidance relates to the regulatory interpretation of the term “autonomous” and 
provides clarification on the use of high authority automated systems in civil UAS.  
The dictionary definition of autonomy is “freedom from external control or influence”. The 
need to meet the safety requirements, defined in the various Certification Specifications 
under CS XX.1309/ CS XX.2510 , for "Equipment, Systems and Installations" means that at 
this point in time all UAS systems are required to perform deterministically. This means 
that their response to any set of inputs must be the result of a pre- designed data 
evaluation output activation process. As a result, there are currently no UAS related 
systems that meet the definition of autonomous.  
In general, automated UAS systems fall in to two categories:  
• Highly automated – those systems that still require inputs from a human operator 
(e.g., co nfirmation of a proposed action) but which can implement the action 
without further human interaction once the initial input has been provided.  
• High authority automated systems – those systems that can evaluate data, select 
a course of action and implement  that action without the need for human input. 
Good examples of these systems are flight control systems and engine control systems that are designed to control certain aspects of aircraft behaviour without input from the flight crew.  
The concept of an “autonomous” UAS is a system that will do everything for itself using high authority automated systems. It will be able to follow the planned route, communicate 
with Aircraft Controllers and other airspace users, detect, diagnose and recover from faults 
and operate at least as safely as a system with continuous human involvement. In essence, an autonomous UAS will be equipped with high authority control systems that can act without input from a human.  
4.5.2.  What is the Difference between Automation and Authority?  
Automation is the capability of a system to act using a set of pre- designed functions 
without human interaction (e.g., robotic manufacturing).  
The level of authority a system has is defined by the results that the system can achieve. For example, a flight control computer may only be able to command a shallow roll angle, 
whereas the human flight crew will be able to demand a much higher angle of roll. A full 
4.5.3.  Use of High Authority S ystems  
High authority automatic systems have the capability to take actions based on an 
evaluation of a given dataset that represents the current situation including the status of all the relevant systems, geographical data and environmental data.  
Although these systems will take actions based on an evaluation of a given dataset, they 
are required to be deterministic in that the system must always respond in the same way to the same set of data. This means that the designs of the associated monitoring and control systems need to be carefully considered such that the actions related to any given 
dataset are appropriate and will not hazard either the aircraft or any third parties in the 
same area.  
High authority automatic systems are usually composed of a number of sub- systems used 
to gather data, evaluate data, select an appropriate set of actions and issue commands to related control systems. These systems can include flight management systems, detect and avoid systems, power management systems, etc.  
In a UAS a system can have authority over two types of function: general control system 
functions (e.g., flight control computers) and navigational commands.  
4.5.4.  Delegation to a High Authority Automatic System  
The concept of high authority automatic systems covers a range of varying degrees of system authority ranging from full authority where the systems are capable of operating 
without human control or oversight to lesser levels of authority where the system is 
dependent upon some degree of human input (e.g., confirmation of proposed actions).  
The level of authority a system can have with respect to navigational commands may vary during any flight, dependent upon the hazards the aircraft is faced with (e.g., terrain or potential airborne conflict with other aircraft) and the time available for the human operator 
to effectively intervene. If the aircraft is flying in clear airspace with no nearby terrain the 
system may be designed such that any flight instructions (e.g., amendment to a flight plan) are instigated by a human operator. However, if the aircraft is faced with an immediate 
hazard (terrain/other aircraft) and there is insufficient time for a human operator to 
intervene (based on signal latency etc.) the UAS will need to be able to mitigate that risk. These mitigations may include the use of full authority automatic systems.  
Although it is anticipated that most systems will be operated using a lesser level of authority, the design of the overall system (command unit, the aircraft itself and related 
operational procedures) will need to take account of the failure conditions associated with 
aircraft and this may drive a need for the use of full authority systems.  
4.5.4.1.  Learning/Self -Modifying Systems  
A learning, or self -modifying system is one that uses data related to previous actions to 
modify its outputs such that their results are closer to a previously defined desired 
outcome. Although learning systems do have the potential to be used in UAS, the overall 
safety requirements (for example the need to comply with CS XX.1309) still apply. This 
means that it may not be possible to use these systems to their full potential.  
It is also important to note that these systems have the potential to be more susceptible to the effects of emergent behaviour and, as such, the evaluation of such systems would out of necessity need to be very detailed.  
4.5.4.2.  Other Potential Developments  
It is possible that, at some point in the future, the aviation industry may consider the use of non-deterministic systems to improve overall system flexibility and performance.  
Whilst there are no regulations that specifically prohibit this, the use of non- deterministic 
systems will drive a number of system and operational safety assessment issues that will 
need to be addressed before the use of this type of technology could be accepted for use 
in aviation.  
4.5.4.3.  Human Authority over Automated and Autonomous UAS  
The general principle to be observed is that all UAS must be under the command of a 
remote pilot. Dependent upon the level of autonomy, a remote pilot  may simultaneously 
assume responsibility for more than one aircraft, particularly when this can be 
accomplished safely whilst directing the activities of one or more other rem ote pilot s. 
However, if this option is to be facilitated the applicant will need to demonstrate that the 
associated human factors issues (displayed information, communication protocols, etc) have been fully considered and mitigated.   
The following breakdown of automation levels provide a view to the progress of 
automation within the command- and-control structure of a UAS operation. The levels of 
human and machine interaction, control and responsibilities are detailed in the table below.  
Level 0 – No Automation 
No automation, the remote pilot is responsible for all functions.  
Level 1 – Assisted Automation 
Lowest level of automation, systems which have been automated up to this level are used 
to support the remote pilot in performing the specified funct ion. 
Level 2 – Partial Automation 
function to relieve remote pilot workload and allow focus on other tasks. Control and monitoring are shared between the remote pilot and the system, the interactions must be well understood by the human managing the operational tasks.  
Level 3 –  Supervised Automation 
The capability of the automated system is expanded to handle the monitoring and responding to changes in the environment.  The key difference between this level of 
automation and lower levels is that the human is supervising the outcomes and intervening when required to manage the safety of the operation.  
Level 4 –  High Automation 
At high automation level, controlling the ai rcraft and monitoring the external/internal 
environment is entirely automated with no human oversight. The remote pilot does not 
receive flight information, instead the remote pilot receives operational information of interest to ensure the system is meeti ng operational objectives.  
Level 5 –  Full Automation 
At full automation there is no human involvement in the operation and human interaction is limited to providing high- level operational directives and observing resulting outcomes. No 
human intervention i s possible as the operation outcomes are entirely within the scope of 
the machine.  
The functions listed in the table below are described as per the following:  
Human- Machine Teaming : Describes the relationship between humans and machines 
performing tasks as  automation increases.  
Sustained Aircraft Manoeuvre Control : Describes how the aircraft is controlled (e.g., 
crew inputs), systems are monitored (e.g., fuel level monitoring), and communication with airspace users (e.g., ATC) is achieved as tasks are automated.  
Object and Event Detection and Response (OEDR) : Describes how the aircraft interacts 
with the environment in which itis present and how it may respond (e.g., detect and avoid failure monitoring). Events may occur on- board the aircraft or may be external and 
communicated to the mechanism responsible for sustaining aircraft manoeuvre control.  
Fallback (Integrity Thresholds Exceeded) :  Describes how the UAS responds to a 
failure and where control of the operations is expected to reside. Fallback is triggered 
when specific metrics associated with the operation of the system exceed the defined 
thresholds for safety.  
Communication with External Systems (Ground and Airspace systems) : Describe 
how the UAS interacts with the external systems in which it is  operating (e.g., ground crew, 
ATC).  
 
UAS Automation Levels in Flight Operations 
                      Level                   
Functions   Level 0 Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Level 4 Level 5 Components 
of Trusted 
Autonomy No 
Automation Assisted 
Automation Partial 
Automation Supervised 
Automation High 
Automation Full 
Automation 
Human-Machine 
Teaming Human led Human-In-
the-loop Human-In-
the-loop Human-
In/On-the-
loop Human-
On-the-
loop Human- Off-
the-loop Human-
Machine 
Symbiosis 
Sustained Aircraft 
Manoeuvre Control Human Human AND 
Machine Machine 
(Managed 
by Human) Machine 
(Supervised 
by Human) Machine Machine Machine 
Object and Event 
Detection and 
Response (OEDR) Human Human Machine 
(Managed 
by Human) Machine 
(Supervised 
by Human) Machine Machine  Machine 
Fallback (Integrity 
Thresholds Exceeded) Human Human Human Human Fall back 
Ready 
Human Machine 
(Limited or 
Segregated 
Operations) Optimized 
Human 
AND/OR 
Machine 
Communication with 
External Systems 
(Ground and Airspace 
systems)  Human Human Human OR 
Machine 
(Managed 
by Human) Machine 
(Supervised 
by Human Machine Machine Machine 
Table 5 - Summary of Automation Levels  
4.5.5.  Safe Operation with Other Airspace Users  
Autonomous UAS must demonstrate an equivalent level of compliance with the rules and 
procedures that apply to manned aircraft. Therefore, this will require the inclusion of an 
approved Detect and Avoid capability when UAS are operating in non- segregated 
airspace.
Any a utonomous UAS operation is expected to work seamlessly with6 ATM providers and 
other airspace users. The autonomous UAS will be required to comply with any valid ATC 
instruction or a request for information made by an ATM unit in the same way and within the same timeframe that the pilot of a manned aircraft would. These instructions may take 
a variety of forms and, for example, may be to follow another aircraft or to confirm that 
another aircraft has been detected in an equivalent manner to being “ in visual sight ”. 
4.5.7.  Emergencies 
The decision- making function(s) of any autonomous UAS must be capable of handling the 
same range of exceptional and emergency conditions as manned aircraft, as well as ensuring that malfunction or loss of the decision- making function(s) itself does not cause a 
reduction in safety.  
4.5.8.  Data Integrit y  
Autonomous systems select particular actions based on the data they receive from sensors related to the aircraft environment (airspeed, altitude, met data etc), system status indicators (fault flags, etc), navigational data (programmed flight plans, GPS, etc.) and 
command and control data received from control stations. As such, UAS developers will 
need to ensure that any data related to autonomous control has a sufficient level of integrity such that the ability to comply with basic safety requirements is maintained. This 
will require the development of appropriately robust communication and data validation 
systems. 
4.5.9.  Security  
An autonomous system must be demonstrated to be protected from accepting 
unauthorised commands, or from being “spoofed” by false or  misleading data. 
Consequently, UAS will have a high degree of dependence upon secure communications, 
even if they are designed to be capable of detecting and rejecting false or misleading 
 
6 This means that  air traffic controller s should not have to do anything different using radiotelephony or 
landlines than they would for other aircraft under their control, nor  should the controller have to apply different 
rules or work to different criteria.  


5.1. The UAS Operator  
As with any other form of aviation, the operator , is viewed as being the central and 
essential element of a successful aircraft operation.  Aviation regulation principles largely 
concentrate on the conduct and oversight of the operator; in simple terms, “if the operator 
is organised and efficient, then the operation should be safe and effective”.  
The “ UAS operator” is defined as ‘any legal or natural person operating or intending to 
operate one or more UAS’.   
Note :  
‘natural person’ is the term used when legally referring to a human being and ‘legal perso n’ 
is the term used when legally referring to an organisation/company or similar.  
5.1.1.  Minimum Age  
The minimum age for an individual  to become a UAS operator in the UK is 18 years of 
age, within any category of operation.   
This requirement is set out within article 265D of the ANO.  
5.1.2.  Responsibilities of the UAS Operator  
The UAS operator is responsible for the overall operation of the UAS, and most specifically 
the safety of that operation.  This includes the conduct of any safety risk analysis of the 
intended operations.  
The UAS operator’s responsibilities that are particular to each operating category are listed 
within the Annex to UK Regulation (EU) 2019/947.  A  more general set of responsibilities 
is listed below . 
5.1.3.  Operational Procedures Development/Operations  Manual  
The UAS operator is responsible for  develop ing procedures that are adapted to the type of 
operations and to the risks involved, and for ensuring that those procedures are complied 
with. 
depending on the relative complexity of the operation and/or the organisation involved.  
 Open category - written procedures may not always be necessary, especially if 
the UAS operator is also the only remote pilot.  The limitations of the Open 
category and the operating instructions provided by the UAS manufacturer may 
be considered sufficient.  If more than one remote pilot is employed, the UAS 
operator should:  
o develop and produce procedures for in order to coordinate the activities between its employees; and 
o establish and maintain a list of their personnel and their assigned duties.  
 Specific category – an operations manual, detailing the scope of the organisation 
and the procedures to be followed would be required as a minimum.  This should be expanded as necessary to cover any increased complexity in the types of UAS being flown, or of the types of operation being conducted.  
 Certified category – the full suite of documentation, as expected for an equivalent 
manned aircraft operation, will be required.  
5.1.3.1.  Remote Pilots and Other Operations and Maintenance Personnel  
The UAS operator is responsible for:  
 nominating a remote pilot and any associated personnel for each flight;  
 ensuring that all nominated personnel are sufficiently competent to conduct the flight;  
 ensuring that all nominated personnel are sufficiently briefed on the tasks that they are required to perform;  
 ensuring that all remote pilots are fully familiar with the UAS operator’s operating 
procedures and the operating instructions provided by the manufacturer of the 
UAS. 
 The UAS Operator, in the Specific category, should maintain an aircraft technical 
log book, in order to log the flying time of each aircraft. This should be stored electronically, for audit and oversight purposes. More information can be found in AMC1 UAS.SPEC.050(1)(g) of UK Regulation (EU) 2019/947.  
5.1.3.2.  Use of Contracted Remote pilots  
When authorised by the CAA to do so, UAS operators are permitted to utilise remote pilots 
on an individual contract basis.  In so doing, the UAS operator maintains responsibility for 
the safety of the operation and for ensuring that the competence and obligations of the remote pilot are met in the same way as would be if the contracted remote pilot was an 
employee of the UAS operator.  UAS operators that do not discharge their responsibilities 
5.1.3.3.  Unmanned Aircraft and Associated Supporting Systems  
The UAS operator is responsible for ensuring that the UAS provided for the operation:  
 is suitable for the intended operation;  
 is properly maintained and in a safe condition to be flown;  
 supports the efficient use of radio spectrum in order to avoid harmful 
interference and that the relevant C2 Link frequencies being used are 
appropriately licensed.  
5.1.4.  Operating Licence  
Assimilated Regulation (EU)  1008/2008, does not apply to UAS Operators within the Open 
or Specific Category, and therefore the requirement to obtain an Operating Licence under this regulation does not apply to these operations.   
 
The “remote pilot” is defined as ‘ a natural person responsible for safely conducting the 
flight of an unmanned aircraft by operating its flight controls, either manually or, when the 
unmanned aircraft flies automatically, by monitoring its course and remaining able to intervene and change the course at any time .’ 
The remote pilot is therefore a key component in ensuring that UA are flown safely and legitimately.    
5.2.1.  Minimum Age  
5.2.1.1.  Open Category  
No minimum age.  
5.2.1.2.  Specific Category  
No minimum age is set out in law, however the UAS Operator is expected to include this 
consideration within the OM.  
5.2.1.3.  Certified Category  
The minimum age for flight within the Certified category is determined by the minimum age 
requirements of the licence that is used.  
5.2.2.  Responsibilities  
The remote pilot is nominated for each flight by the UAS operator and is responsible for 
the overall conduct of that flight, with safety obviously being the primary consideration.  
Where other personnel are also involved in the operation, the remote pilot would normally 
also be expected to be ‘in command’ of those personnel.   
The remote pilot’s responsibilities that are particular to each operating category are listed in the Annex of UK Regulation (EU) 2019/947.  A more general set of responsibilities is listed below.  
5.2.2.1.  General Requirement s 
Remote pilots must:  
 
 Have the appropriate remote pilot competency, dependent on the operating category to be able to conduct the flight within the designated operating category.  
 Be fully fam iliar with the operating instructions provided by the manufacturer of 
the UAS.  
Remote pilots must not:  
 Perform their duties while under the influence of psychoactive substances or 
alcohol or when they are unfit to perform their  tasks due to injury, fatigue, 
medication, sickness or other causes  (see 4.2.6 and 4.2.7 below  for further 
details) . 
5.2.2.2.  Pre-flight Responsibilities  
Before the flight is commenced, remote pilots must:  
 
 Ensure that all information regarding the airspace within which the flight will take 
place has been checked and updated, and any relevant clearances or 
authorisations have been obtained.  
 Ensure that the operating environment is compatible with the intended flight 
(weather conditions, electromagnetic energy conditions, survey of obstacles, uninvolved persons, critical infrastructure etc).  
 Ensure that the UAS is in a serviceable condition to complete the intended flight as planned.  This includes:  
o updating any relevant geo- awareness data;  
o the completion of any specified pre- flight checks;  
o ensuring that the UA has sufficient fuel to complete the planned operation with any suitable reserve needed to cater for contingencies;  
 Note : the term “fuel” is intended to include all sources of energy for 
UA, to include (but not limited to) petroleum based, solar, battery or any future source that provides energy to the UA.  
o The checking and, if necessary, programming of any lost C2 Link, return to home, or other emergency recovery function to confirm its ser viceability;  
o the security of any payloads fitted to the UA;  
o the operation of any lighting and/or remote identification systems (if 
applicable) .
While the UA is in flight, remote pilots must:  
 
 Comply with  the operational limitations that are applicable to the operating 
category that the UA is being flown in;  
 Avoid any risk of collision with other aircraft and discontinue the flight if it may 
pose a risk to other aircraft, persons, environment or property;  
 Comply with the operational limitations regarding to any airspace reservations, 
Flight Restriction Zones or other UAS related geographical zones that are within 
or close to the area that the UA is being flown in;  
 Comply with the operating procedures that are set out by the UAS operator;  
 Ensure that the UA is not flown close to or inside any areas where an emergency 
response effort is ongoing, unless they have permission to do so from the 
responsible emergency response personnel.  
Note : 
The term ‘emergency response effort’ covers any activities by police, fire, ambulance, 
coastguard or other similar services where action is ongoing in order to preserve life, 
protect the public or respond to a crime in progress. This includes activities such as road traffic col lisions, fires, rescue operations and firearms incidents, although this list is not 
exhaustive. 
5.2.3.  Competency Requirements  
Remote pilots must be competent to perform their duties.  
The competency of the personnel involved in the operation of an unmanned aircraft is a major  factor in ensuring that unmanned aircraft operations remain tolerably safe. Within 
any UAS operation, the primary focus is obviously placed on the competency of the 
remote pilot.  
Following on with the principle of taking a risk -based approach, the regulations use the 
competency of the remote pilot as a way of complementing the other risk mitigations  and 
so the precise level of competency that is required is dependent on the category of operation.   
5.2.3.1.  Open Category  
Apart from subcategory A1 operations involving unmanned aircraft that have a mass of less than 250g, all remote pilots operating in the Open category are required to complete 
an online training course and successfully complete an online theor y test  before they can 
at which point it must be renewed.   
 
This test is the ‘foundation’ upon which all other levels of remote pilot competency are 
built; it is a multiple -choice examination and there is no requirement to undertake any 
practical flight test.   The testing package also includes an educational module known as 
‘The Drone and Model aircraft Code’  (the principle being similar to the Highway Code as 
used for car driving).  
The theory test is accessed via the CAA’s operator registration webpages and is at this link Register and take the test to fly
. 
The individual competency requirements for each subcategory are listed below.  
A1 subcategory  
The remote pilot competency requirements for the A1 subcategory are dependent on the flying weight or class of UA being flown as  follows:  
UA mass/class  Competency requirements 
Less than 250g (including ‘legacy’)  Read the user manual  
A1 Transitional (<500g)  Obtain a ‘flyer ID’ and an A2 CofC (see 4.2.3.1.2 below)  
Table 6- Summary of A1 pilot competence requirements  
A2 subcategory  
Flights within the A2 subcategory involve the operation of larger UA (less than 4kg flying weight) within residential, commercial, industrial or recreational areas (which may also be known as ‘congested areas’) and in closer proximity to uninvolved persons.   
Because of the additional risks involved, remote pilots must successfully pass an additional theoretical examination to obtain an A2 Certificate of Competency (A2 CofC).  
The A2 CofC is  a remote pilot competency certificate primarily intended to assure safe 
operations of unmanned aircraft close to uninvolved persons. The certificate assures an 
appropriate knowledge of the technical and operational mitigations for ground risk (the risk 
of a person being struck by the unmanned aircraft).   
The examination is conducted at an RAE test facility (see 4.2.4 below).  Further details are contained within CAP 722B
 . 
A3 subcategory  
Remote pilots flying within the A3 subcategory must be in possession of a ‘flyer ID’.  
 
 
In general, a VLOS remote pilot is expected to hold a General VLOS Certificate (GVC) as 
a minimum.  
Due to the wide- ranging scope of the Specific category, the remote pilot competency 
requirements also will vary widely, dependent on the type of operation being conducted.  
Remote pilot competency requirements will be set out in each individual operational authorisation document.  UAS operators will be expected to propose the levels of remote pilot competency through the risk assessment associated with the particular operation.   
For operations using a PDRA, the remote pilot competency requirements will be specified within the text of the relevant PDRA scenario (see GVC below).   
UAS Operators conducting more complex operations, who’s RPs may hold other qualifi cations, must ensure that their RPs have a full understanding of the applicable UAS 
regulations. This may be achieved by either ensuring they hold a valid GVC, or by carrying out internal training. UAS Operators who chose to carry out internal training, must ensure the theoretical knowledge syllabus described in AMC1 Article 8  to UK Regulation (EU) 
2019/947, is followed.   
‘NQE full recommendations’  are a previous version of the GVC course, and although no 
longer issued, some RPs may still hold these qualifications. These qualifications have been superseded by the GVC, and as such the CAA will no longer recognise them after 01 January 2024; until this date, the CAA will recognise their use for operations under an 
existing OA. Any UAS Operator applying for a new OA, will need to select an alternative 
pilot competence qualification, such as the GVC.  
Note:  
Other qualifications with the same name (i.e. GVC) issued outside the UK, are not 
automatically recognised by the CAA. Any such qualifications that are recognised as 
equivalent to the UK GVC, will be promulgated separately to this document
Remote pilots in the Specific category are expected to keep a flying log book  in order to 
meet the regulatory requirements of UAS.SPEC.050, as a record of their flying hours, to 
help evidence currency and to act as a record should it be required in a subsequent investigation. This should be kept on an electronic system , for oversight and audit 
purposes.  
Further information can be found in AMC1 UAS.SPEC.050(1)(d)(i),(ii) and (iii).  
 
The General VLOS Certificate (GVC)  
The General VLOS Certificate (GVC), is a remote pilot competency certificate which has 
been introduced as a simple qualification that satisfies the remote pilot competency 
requirements for VLOS operations within the Specific category.    
The GVC satisfies the competency requirements of any  published PDRA that involves 
VLOS flight.   
The GVC is comprised of a theoretical examination and a practical flight test, which are 
both conducted at an RAE facility.   
Further details of the GVC can be found in AMC1 Article 8, to UK Regulation (EU) 
2019/947.  
5.2.3.3.  Certified Category  
For the certified category, the requirements are as follows , the remote pilot will be 
expected to hold either:  
 
• an appropriate manned aviation pilot’s licence associated with the type of 
operation being conducted (with appropriate mitigation related to the operation of the particular unmanned aircraft) ; or,  
• an RPL (when the RPL requirements are published and applicable).  
Note : 
The requirements for the licensing and training of United Kingdom civil remote pilots have 
not yet been fully developed. United Kingdom requirements will ultimately be determined 
by ICAO Standards and Recommended Practices (SARPs).  ICAO  has developed initial 
standards for a Remote Pilot's Licence (RPL), but these are part of a larger SARPS 
package that will not become applicable until 2024 at the earliest.  Until formal licensing 
requirements are in place the CAA will determine the relevant requirements on a case- by-
case basis, taking into account additional factors such as the type of operation being conducted, and the system being operated.  
Remote pilot currency requirements are set out in AMC1 UAS.SP EC.050(1)(d) , to UK 
Regulation (EU) 2019/947. 
5.2.3.5.  Recognised Assessment Entities (RAE)  
The Recognised Assessment Entity (RAE) Scheme has been developed to assist the CAA 
in assuring the competence of remote pilots for many of the ‘large volume’ VLOS operations  that require an operational authorisation. The CAA approves RAEs to assess 
the competence of remote pilots against a specific set of requirements and to issue the appropriate certificate on the CAA’s behalf. The names of all approved RAE organisations are published on the CAA’s website.  
 Further information regarding RA Es can be found in CAP 722B
 . 
5.2.4.  Medical Requirements  
Remote pilots must not fly when they are unfit to perform their tasks due to injury, fatigue, 
medication, sickness or ‘other causes’.   
5.2.4.1.  Open Category  
While there are no specific requirements or medical standards set out for operations in the Open category, as an outline guide remote pilots should apply the same considerations 
that they would before driving a motor vehicle or riding a pedal cycle on the road.  
5.2.4.2.  Specific Category  
The medical requirements for operations within the Specific category will be set out in the operational authorisation.  Normally, this will be achieved by reference to the medical 
requirements that have been set out by the UAS operator in its operations manual, 
although in some cases, additional requirements may be expressed more precisely.  
 
UAS operators will be expected to propose details of their required medical standards  
through the risk assessment associated with the particular operation.   
5.2.4.3.  Certified Category  
Remote pilots in the Certified category must comply with the medical standards of the 
licence that they hold.  
5.2.5.  Alcohol and Psychoactive Substances – Limitations  
UK Regulation (EU) 2019/947 sets out some basic requirements regarding the remote 
conducting flying duties.  
These limitations are applied in conjunction with the operating category as follows:  
5.2.5.1.  Alcohol  
This section sets out the alcohol requirements for the Open, Specific and Certified 
Categories  of operation.  
 
Open Category 
The regulatory requirement is that remote pilots must not perform their duties under the influence of alcohol. [UAS.OPEN.060(2)(a)]  
• It is the responsibility of the remote pilot to ensure that they are fit to fly and are not under the influence of alcohol.  While the overall message is ‘don’t drink and 
fly’, additional information is provided below for reference and guidance.  
• While no actual limits are specified, the alcohol consumption limitations that are prescribed for driving a car may be considered as an appropriate limit when 
flying in the Open category.  (i.e. if you are fit to drive a car, then you should be 
considered fit to fly in the Open category).  
• These limits are:  
 
     
Table 7 - Summary of alchol limits for driving  
• Personnel carrying out support functions that are directly related to the safe 
operation of the UA while in flight, such as unmanned aircraft observers, or airspace observers, should comply with the same limitations.  Remote pilots are 
directly responsible for ensuring that such personnel are fit to undertake their 
duties.  
Specific category 
The regulatory requirement is that remote pilots must not perform their duties under the influence of alcohol. [UAS.SPEC.060(1)(a)].  
UAS operators will be expected to propose details of proposed alcohol limits for 
operational personnel within the OM procedures and risk assessment associated with 
their particular operation, and will be reflected within the operational authorisation.   Level of alcohol  England, Wales & Northern 
Ireland  Scotland  
Micrograms per 100 mi llilitres of breath  35 22 
Micrograms per 100 millilitres of blood  80 50 
Micrograms per 100 millilitres of urine  107 67 
flying in the Specific category, and in particular the requirement to comply with the precise conditions of the operational authorisation, the limits prescribed for 
manned aviation in Railways and Transport Safety Act 2003
 (RTSA 2003)  
Section 93  should be complied with.  
• These limits are:  
Level of alcohol  All UK nations  
Micrograms per 100 millilitres of breath  9 
Micrograms per 100 millilitres of blood  20 
Micrograms per 100 millilitres of urine  27 
Table 8- Summary of alcohol limits set out within the RTSA 2003  
• Personnel carrying out support functions that are directly related to the safe 
operation of the UA while in flight, such as unmanned aircraft observers, or 
airspace observers, should comply with the same limitations.  
Alcohol limits within the Ce rtified category will be set out within future regulatory 
updates.  
5.2.5.2.  Psychoactive Substances  
This section sets out the psychoactive substance requirements for the Open, Specific and 
Certified Categories of operation.  
Open category 
Remote pilots must not perform their duties under the influence of psychoactive substances.  
Specific category 
Remote pilots must not perform their duties under the influence of psychoactive substances.  
Certified category 
Remote pilots must not carry out any aviation function if their ability to perform the function is impaired because of drugs. [RTSA 2003 Section 92] 
Note:   For the purposes of RTSA 2003, the term ‘drug’ includes any intoxicant other 
than alcohol.  
5.2.6.  Radio Licensing  
5.2.6.1.  Use of Radio Telephony  
There are some circumstances in which the use of VHF radiotelephony (RT) voice communications may be necessary and may form part of a mitigation within a risk 
assessment, for a specific category UAS operation. These are primarily situations where 
quick communication is needed with the air traffic service unit, and/or enhanced situational awareness for both the remote pilot, and other pilots, is necessary.  
VHF radio communication should not be required in the Open category .  
The use of VHF RT is strictly controlled for several reasons and will only be considered as a mitigation within a safety case for those operations which absolutely require it.  
Such circumstances may include:  
• Operations within the close vicinity of an aerodrome, where permission for 
entry into an FRZ/ATZ has been arranged and the use of VFH RT has been 
requested by the ATS unit . 
• Operations in close vicinity to other  airspace users - such as air shows and 
flying  displays .  
It is not possible to give an exhaustive list of such circumstances when the use of VHF RT 
is appropriate, and it is the responsibility of the operator to apply such a mitigation 
appropriately. Acceptance of such a mitigation within the safety case does not authorise its 
use. A number of requirements must also be met in order to legally make use of  VHF RT, 
which are detailed below.  
If the operation is approved with such a mitigation, then the following requirements must 
be met and detailed within the operations manual, and may also be set out within the 
conditions of the operational authorisation:  
• Suitable VHF radio must be installed on the unmanned aircraft, and a relay to 
the ground station provided to enable remote pilot communication. The equipment and installation must be approved by EASA or the CAA. A ground-
based VHF radio must not be used.  This is due to regulatory requirements set 
out by Ofcom. Any queries on this requirement should be directed to Ofcom.  
• Appropriate licence held by the remote pilot; this will normally be an FRTOL, 
which must be issued by the CAA following recommendation from an 
examiner. Further information can be found here
.  
• Appropriate radio licence: the radio must either be licenced, or have an exemption from the wireless telegraphy act, to operate. Ofcom issue these 
licences. Further information can be found on the Ofcom aeronautical 
licencing web pages here
. 
Further information on radio requirements can be found in AIP GEN 1.5 section 5.  
In some cases, an innovation and trial licence may be suitable. Further information on the Ofcom Innovation and trial licence can be found here
. 
The use of radiotelephony on aeronautical band radios within the Specific category for 
contact with air traffic control should be limited to exceptional circumstances and be 
carried out as directed by the air traffic service unit with which the remote pilot needs to communicate. In the vast majority of circumstances VHF RT is not required, and other methods of communication and/or procedural mitigations are sufficient.   
 
6.1. Introduction  
This Chapter offers guidance to industry on how to address the Human Factors issues 
associated with the design, operation and maintenance of UAS and the proper 
development, implementation and assurance of a Safety Management System (SMS) as defined in ICAO Annex 19 (Safety Management System).  
It is recognised by the CAA that is important to include effective Human Factors 
considerations in the design, operation and maintenance of UAS.  
The fundamental concepts of Human Factors in aviation are covered by CAP 719. 
Additional guidance on human factors issues associated with aircraft maintenance is provided in CAP 716.  
It is important to recognise that the human is an integral element of any UAS operation 
and, therefore, in addition to the existing Human Factors issues that relate to aviation development, operation and maintenance, several unique Human Factors issues associated with remote operation will also need to be addressed.  
This guidance outlines several Human Factors recommendations related to the design, 
production operation and maintenance of UAS flown routinely in UK airspace.  
Of equal importance is the principle of an effective Safety Management System (SMS) as 
detailed in ICAO Annex 19 which defines the steps to follow the identification of hazards, safety reporting, risk management, performance measurement and safety assurance. A Safety Management System program important for both manned and unmanned aviation. 
Correct application of the Safety Management System in all categor ies of operations  is 
important and will ensure the operation is managed in line with appropriate safety parameters.  
6.2. Human Factors  
6.2.1.  General Human Factors 
A systems approach must be adopted in the analysis, design and development of the UAS. This approach deals with all the systems as a combined entity and addresses the 
interactions between those systems. Such an approach must involve a detailed analysis of the human requirements and encompass the Human Factors Integration domains:  
• Personnel;  
• Training;  
• Human Engineering;  
• System Safety;  
• Health Hazards.  
6.2.2.  Design Human Factors 
There are two groups of Human Factors issues that need to be addressed for design:  
• Human factors issues affecting design teams;  
• Design induced remote pilot or maintenance human factors issues.  
6.2.2.1.  Human Factors that Affect Design Teams  
There are two levels of Human Factors issues that need to be addressed for design:  
• Human factors that affect design teams;  
• Design induced remote pilot or maintenance human factors iss ues. 
Each of these issues can result in a design team making an error and failing to detect it 
before the aircraft or aircraft system enters service. These errors can result in operational 
or maintenance problems (system failures, inappropriate maintenance etc) and can even 
drive additional human factors issues in other aviation domains such as the flight deck or maintenance because of a lack of quality assurance or control to avoid human error.  
Organisations developing UAS must ensure that the programme management aspects of 
their projects address potential Human Factors issues (e.g. provision of appropriate work 
spaces and instructions, effective control of the number of simultaneous demands made on individuals, effective control of the rate of requirement  change, management of fatigue 
etc). The process to achieve this must be described to the authority for any proposed certification project.  
6.2.2.2.  Design Induced Remote Pilot Human Factors  
The set of design induced remote pilot Human Factors issues includes but is not limited to:  
• Non-optimal workspace layout which increases the likelihood of errors;  
• Failure to provide on a timely manner relevant information for planning or corrective actions to the remote pilot ; 
so that effective assimilation is not possible. Incorrect prioritisation of alerts;  
• Insufficient notice of the need to perform a task (possibly related to data latency or poor planning);  
• Inadequate, incomplete or ambiguous procedures, work instructions;  
• Lack of clarity regarding where to find the relevant control instructions (Standard Operating Procedures, Aircraft Flight Manuals etc);  
• Non-obvious system mode changes or mode confusion.  
Each of these issues may result in a remote pilot  either making an error or failing to detect 
an aircraft safety issue.  
Organisations developing UAS must ensure that any identified potential Human Factors issues (e.g. management of information to the pilot so that they  can integrate this 
effectively,  effective control of the number of simultaneous demands made on remote 
pilots etc) are addressed and mitigated as part of the UAS development processes. How this will be achieved must be described to the authority for any proposed certification project.  
6.2.2.3.  D esign Induced Maintenance Human Factors  
The set of design induced maintenance Human Factors issues includes but is not limited 
to: 
• Incomplete situation awareness (because of missing/inadequate information 
and/or data latency);  
• Information overload/underload;  
• Incorrect prioritisation of alerts;  
• Insufficient notice of the need to perform a task (possibly related to data latency or poor planning);  
• Inadequate, incomplete or ambiguous procedures, work instructions;  
• Lack of clarity regarding where to find the relevant control instructions (Standard Operating Procedures, Aircraft Flight Manuals etc);  
• Non-obvious system mode changes.  
Each of these issues can result in a maintenance error which could result in an aircraft safety issue.  
Organisations that are developing UAS must ensure that any identified potential 
maintenance Human Factors issues (e.g. provision of clear and unambiguous task instructions etc) are addressed and mitigated as part of the UAS development processes. 
How this will be achieved must be described to the authority for any proposed certification 
6.2.3.  Operational Human Factors  
In addition to operational Human Factors issues, experienced in other parts of the aviation 
system, the physical separation of the remote pilot  introduc es several issues that must be 
considered. These include but are not limited to:  
• Degradation of information due to remote operation and associated lack of multi -
sensory feedback, which does not allow the remote  pilot to correctly understand 
how the UAS is operating or provides misleading information;  
• Temporal degradation resulting from data latency, pilot recognition, pilot response and pilot command latency over the data link requires consideration in the design of controls and displays;  
• The remote pilot’s risk perception and behaviour may be affected by the absence 
of sensory/perceptual cues and the sense of a shared fate with the vehicle;  
• Bandwidth limitations and reliability of the data link compromising the amount and quality of information available to the remote pilot and thereby limiting his/her 
awareness of the UAS status and position;  
• If the remote pilot swap s with another remote pilot  during a long flight, issues 
around effective hand- over procedures and communication must be mitigated 
(further details are provided later in this document).  
It is therefore important to:  
• Avoid presenting misleading cues and to consider alternative methods of representing the UAS data;  
• Prioritise relevant data sent over the C2 L ink to satisfy the needs for all phases of 
the operation;  
Ensure that data link characteristics and performance (such as latency and bandwidth) are taken account of within the relevant information and status displays in the Command Unit . 
6.2.4.  Authority Control  
The remote pilot is ultimately responsible for the safe conduct of the aircraft. They will, 
therefore, be required to sanction all actions undertaken by the aircraft whether that is 
during the planning stage (by acceptance of the flight plan) or during the execution of the 
mission via authorisation, re- plans or direct command. Though fully autonomous operation 
of a UAS is not currently envisaged, certain elements of a mission may be carried out 
Collision Avoidance System where, due to possible latency within the C2 L ink, the r emote 
pilot may not have enough time to react and therefore the on- board systems may need to 
be given the authority to take control of the aircraft.  
This level  of independent capability, that must operate predictably and safely when 
required, can also be harnessed as a deliberative function throughout the flight. This supports a change in the piloting role from a low -level manual type of control to an 
effective high- level decision maker. Due to the nature of remote operation, the command 
unit need no longer be constrained to follow a traditional flight deck design philosophy and 
must be designed to fit the new operator role. Account may be taken of enhanced system functionality allowing the pilot to control the systems as required via delegation of authority.  
 A clear understanding of the scope of any autonomous operation and its automated sub-
systems is key to safe operations. Specific areas that must be addressed include:  
• User’s understanding of the system’s operation;  
• User’s understanding of what mode of operating the aircraft is in, and what level 
of control authority the system has  
• Recovery of control after failure of an automated system;  
• User’s expertise in manual reversion (they will not necessarily be pilots);  
• Boredom, habituation and fatigue of the pilot;  
Design of the controls, including the design ‘model’, allowing the user to understand how the different levels of automation operate.  
6.2.5.  Ergonomics  
The command unit  will be the major interface between the r emote pilot and the aircraft. 
The advice contained herein relates to the type of information and the nature of the tasks that would be undertaken at an command unit, it does not set the airworthiness, technical 
or security requirements. The ergonomic standards must ensure that the remote pilot 
works in an environment that is fit for purpose. That is;  
• The environment does not create distractions;  
• It provides a suitable and comfortable environment for a range of human crewmembers  (for example different heights and other anthropometrical 
measurements);  
• It will allow the r emote pilot to maintain alertness throughout a shift period;  
• The ergonomics of the wider environment in which the command unit  is located 
The ergonomic requirements of ‘handheld’ (VLOS) remote pilot stations must also be 
considered. Careful consideration must be given to the environmental conditions that will 
be encountered when operating outdoors (excesses in temperature, wet or windy 
conditions etc.). The potential for distraction to the pilot is also much greater in this environment.  
6.2.6.  Remote Flight Crew Awareness  
Several sub- systems associated with the operation of a UAS are likely to be complex in 
their operation and therefore may be automated. The system must provide the operator 
with appropriate information to monitor and control its operation. Provision must be made 
for the operator to be able to intervene and override the system (e.g. abort take- off, 
landing, go around).  
6.2.7.  Handover to Another Command Unit/Transfer of Control Between Remote Pilots  
UAS operations may require the transfer of control to another remote pilot. This operation 
needs to be carefully designed to ensure that the handover is accomplished in a safe and consistent manner and would be expected to include the following elements:  
• Offer of control;  
• Exchange of relevant information;  
• Acceptance of control;  
• Confirmation of successful handover.  
The exchange of information between r emote pilots (co -located or remotely located) will 
require procedures that ensure that the receiving pilot has complete knowledge of the following:  
• Flight Mode;  
• UAS flight parameters and aircraft status;  
• UAS sub-system status (fuel system, engine, communications, autopilot etc);  
• Aircraft position, flight plan and other airspace related information (relevant NOTAMs etc.);  
• Weather;  
• The current ATC clearance and frequency in use;  
the accepting command unit  are correctly aligned with the transferring 
command unit . 
The transferring pilot will remain in control of the unmanned aircraft until the handover is 
complete and the accepting pilot has confirmed that they are ready to assume control. In 
addition:  
• Procedures to cater for the recovery of control in the event of a failure during the transfer process will be required;  
• Special attention will be required when designing handover procedures 
involving a significant change in the control interface, for example between a 
VLOS 'Launch and Recovery Element' command unit  and a BVLOS 'En- Route' 
command unit . 
The effective Transfer  of Controls between r emote pilots is important. P rocedures should 
be established on the Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) if required for the type of operation intended.  
6.2.8.  C
rew Resource Management  
Crew Resource Management principles play an equally important role in the command unit  
as they do on a manned flight deck. The allocation and delineation of roles must ensure a 
balanced workload and shared or complementary understanding of the UAS status and 
proximity to other aircraft and flight paths to ensure that:  
• The display design provides clear and rapid information retrieval matched to the human needs;  
• The CU design promotes a clear and effective team co- ordination.  
6.2.9.  Fatigue and Stress  
Fatigue and stress are contributory factors which are likely to increase the propensity for 
human error. Therefore, to ensure that vigilance is maintained at a satisfactory level in terms of safety, consideration must be given to the following:  
• Crew duty times;  
• Regular breaks;  
• Rest periods and opportunity for napping during circadian low periods;  
• Health and Safety requirements;  
• The crew responsibility and task/cognitive workload (including the potential for 
‘boredom’) ; 
• Ability to mitigate the effects from non -work areas (e.g. financial pressure 
causing anxiety).  
The work regime across the crew must take this into account. Where required, an effective 
Fatigue Reporting System should be implemented within the organisation to increase 
awareness of fatigue or stress risks and mitigate them accordingly . 
Further information to support Fatigue Management approaches for safety relevant workers can be found in the ICAO Fatigue Management guidance material (Doc. 9966).  
6.2.10.  Degradation and Failure  
Degradation of performance and failures will require a philosophy for dealing with 
situations to ensure consistent and appropriate application of warnings, both visual and 
auditory. The philosophy must ensure that:  
The design provides good error detection and recovery;  
The design is fail -safe and protects against inadvertent operator actions that could 
instigate a catastrophic failure;  
In the event of degraded or total breakdown in the communication link the status of the lost 
link will be displayed to the operator. Ideally the expected planned reactions of the UA to 
the situation will also be displayed to the operator;  
Operating procedures are designed to be intuitive, not ambiguous and reinforced by 
training as required.  
6.2.11.  Maintenance Human Factors  
The set of problems that can initiate Human Factors issues for maintenance teams is not dissimilar to other environments. These include but are not limited to:  
• Insufficient time to perform a task;  
• Insufficient training and experience to perform a task;  
• Inadequate, incomplete or ambiguous procedures, work instructions;  
• Inappropriate working environments that can lead to distraction (e.g. noisy offices, multiple demands on individual’s time);  
• Poor or non- existent working relationships with management and/or other teams.  
Each of these issues can result in a maintenance team making an error and failing to 
detect it before the aircraft or aircraft system enters service. These errors can result in 
operational or maintenance problems (system failures, inappropriate maintenance etc.) 
and can even drive additional Human Factors issues in other aviation domains such as the 
flight deck or maintenance.  
Organisations that are developing UASs must ensure that any maintenance Human 
Factors issues (e.g. provision of clear and unambiguous instructions) are addressed. How 
this will be achieved must be described to the authority for any proposed certification 
project.  
6.2.12.  Future Trends  
Future developments in UAS Industry are moving towards reducing remote pilot  workload 
through advanced decision support systems and enhanced automation. Human Factors expertise will be central to such developments to produce a system that is not only safe but also ensures the correct level of crew workload for all mission tasks and phases of flight.  
6.3. Safety Management 
Further guidance on Safety Management systems can be found in CAP 795.  
 
   
 
 
CAP 722 | Ni nth Edition Amendment 2  Annex A - CAP 722 Revision History   
Ninth Edition Amendment 2  April 2024 
Updates throughout document to update references to legislation to reflect new terms . 
Addition  of notes recommended by AAIB. Updates to URLs following a website re-
structure since publication. Updated information regarding insurance for aircraft with a 
MTOM of less than 500kg used for non- commercial purposes. Updated acronym 
referencing.  Clarification of BVLOS with visual observer rules.  
Ninth Edition Amendment 1  December 2022  
Update in Section 2.2.1.2 to the A1 section to clarify that ‘transitional’ A1 UA must not 
overfly uninvolved people, and that privately built UA may make use of the A1 provisions. 
Simplification of the A2 section, to remove reference to class mark requirements.  
Reflection of maximum height provisions for unmanned sailplanes in section 2.1.1.1.  
Updates to URLs following a website re- structure since publication.  
Ninth Edition  December 2022 
This revision applies the effect of additional regulations and other updates that have been made within the UK since the Eighth edition was published, enhances some guidance 
points and corrects a number of minor typography errors.  Annex A, B, C and D have been 
deleted as a result of the publication of a separate AMC/GM document.  Chapter 3 has 
been split into chapter 3 (Airworthiness and Certification) and chapter 4 (Aircraft Systems).  
 
Eighth Edition   November 2020  
This revision implements the new UAS Regulatory Package, which becomes applicable in 
its entirety in the UK from 31 December  2020.  The document has been completely 
restructured in order to accommodate the necessary changes and present them in a 
clearer and more comprehensible manner.  
 
Seventh Edition   September 2019  
A number of small amendments have been made to CAP 722 Seventh edition since it was published in July.  
 
 
CAP 722 | Ninth Edition Amendment 2  Annex A - CAP 722 Revision History   
This amendment updates references and text in accordance with ANO 2016 and its 
subsequent amendments, changes to European regulations brought about by the 
publication of the New Basic Regulation in Autumn 2018, incorporates Guidance material 
that has been published in the interim, and brings terms, definitions and procedures/processes up to date as they have evolved, and a change to the structure of the document.  
In addition, the opport unity has been taken to transfer the Appendices into two separate, 
but related, documents with CAP 722A covering the development of Operating Safety Case, and CAP 722B covering the requirements for National Qualified Entities.  
Some minor editorial amendments have been made to this edition, since original publication in July. A list of these changes can be found on the CAP 722 publication web page.  
Sixth Edition  March 2015 
CAP 722 has been completely refreshed and restructured under this revision.  Key changes to the document are:  
 Complete restructure of the document.  
 Updates to all Chapters (including Abbreviations and Glossary of Terms).  
 Introduction of a Concept of Operations Approach (ConOps)  
 Introduction of the UAS OSC -  Unmanned Aircraft System Operating Safety Case 
(formerly titled Congested Areas Operating Safety Case).  
 Introduction of an Approval Requirements Map.  
 Removal of Military Operations Chapters.  
 Addition of Alternative Means of Compliance to demonstrate Operator Competency.  
 Introduction of Restricted Category Qualified Entities.  
Fifth Edition  10 August 2012  
The changes at this edition primarily concentrate on updating areas where terms, definitions or procedures have evolved significantly and where details of c hapter sponsors 
have also been changed. The specific areas to note are:  
 Revised Abbreviations and Glossary (also reflected t hroughout the document), 
which reflect worldwide developments in UAS terminology.  
 Introduction of a Human Factors chapter.  
 A complete rewrite of the ‘Civi l Operations, Approval to Operate’ chapter.  
CAP 722 | Ninth Edition Amendment 2  Annex A - CAP 722 Revision History   
 A complete revision to Section 4 (Military Operations), which reflects the formation 
of the Military Aviation Authority (MAA) and the revised Military Aviati on Regulatory 
Publications.  
Fourth Edition  6 April 2010 
This edition incorporates the changes to legislation introduced in Air Navigation Order 
2009 (ANO 2009) regarding the requirement for operators of small  unmanned aircraft to 
obtain a CAA permission when their aircraft are being used for aerial work, and also in some cases for surveillance or data acquisition purposes (now termed small unmanned surveillance aircraft).  
Unmanned aircraft having a mass of less than 7 kg are now covered by this new legislation, which is intended to ensure public safety by applying appropriate operational 
constraints, dependent on the flying operation being conducted and the potent ial risks to 
third parties. In line with this change, some guidance on the additional details  to be 
provided within an application for permission to operate small unmanned ai rcraft have also 
been included (Annex 1 to Section 3, Chapter 1).  
Expanded guidance regarding the reporting of incidents/occurrences involving the 
operation of unmanned aircr aft has also been included; such reporting is view ed as being 
a vital element in the successful development of the 'fledgling' civilian UAS industry.  
Finally, in line with continued developments in UAS terminology, and the principle that 
unmanned aircraft are still to be treated as aircraft rather than as a separate entity .  In line 
with this, the term 'pilot' (i.e. the person who operates the controls for the aircraft) is used 
more frequently. The term 'Remot ely Piloted Aircraft' (RPA) is also emerging in some 
areas, although it has not yet been whol eheartedly accepted for use in the UK.  
Third Edition  28 April 2008  
Introduction 
Following discussions at the CAA Unmanned Aircraf t Systems (UAS) Working Group, held 
on 12 October 2006, it was considered that suf ficient progress had been made in many 
areas of UAS work to warrant a substantial rev iew of CAP 722. In particular, as an 
upsurge in UAS activity is envisaged over the com ing years it is essential that both 
industry and the CAA, as the r egulatory body, c learly recognize the way ahead in terms of 
policy and regulations and, more importantly, in safety standards.  
With an ever -increasing number of manufacturers and operators, it is vital that the 
regulations keep pace with UAS developments,  without losing sight of the safety issues 
involved in the simultaneous operation of ma nned and unmanned aircraft. As a living 
document, it is intended that CAP 722 will be under constant review and that it will be 
revised, where necessary, to take account  of advances in technology, feedback from 
industry, recognised best practice and changes in regulations, which are developed to 
CAP 722 | Ninth Edition Amendment 2  Annex A - CAP 722 Revision History   
there will inevitably be times w hen Chapter  sponsors will have to be approached directly 
for further guidance.  
Revisions in this Edition 
The layout of the document has been amended to m ore clearly separate Civil and Military 
guidance and as such the Chapters have changed in many areas. In addition, while there 
are many minor textual changes to the document, a significant revision has been made in 
many areas and as such it is reco mmended that those involved in UAS operations review 
the entire content of the document to ensure that they are fully cog nisant with the update.  
Impending Changes to Regulation 
The CAA is in the process of a consultation with industry over a proposal to amend the Air 
Navigation Order which will require operators of UAS with a UAV component of less than 7 
kg mass to obtain a CAA permission, as is currently the case for UAVs with a mass of 7- 20 
kg. This proposal intends to ensure public safety by applying operational constraints to 
UAVs of less than 7 kg mass , as deemed appropriate to the type of operation envisaged 
and the potential risk to members of the public.  
If the consultation exercise approves the proposal, it is likely that the ANO Amendment will 
pass into law in December 2008. Pot ential operators of UAS with a UAV component of 
less than 7 kg must  ascertain,  before commencing operations, whether or not they are 
required to obtain a CAA permission.  
Third Edition incorporating amendment 2009/01 14 April 2009  
This amendment is published in order to update contact details  and references throughout 
the document and make some editorial corrections.  
Second Edition  12 November 2004 
The major changes in this document are on legal, certification, spectrum and security 
issues.  
Details of the CAA Policy on Model Aircraft/ Light UAV have also been included.  
First Edition  29 May 2002 
First edition.  
